 
integratedITSM
Navigating IT Service Management in the Digital Era
  
© Professional Designations Corp. 2024. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without written permission from Professional Designations Corp. Inquiries for permission to reproduce, transmit, or use this material for any purpose should be directed to the publisher, Professional Designations Corp.

Contents
Acknowledgements IV integratedITSM Book Series V Foreword VI Introduction 7
IT Service Management Frameworks 8
Chapter 1: What Is integratedITSM? 11
Defining integratedITSM 12
The Three Levels of Integration 13
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 15
Systems Theory Applied to integratedITSM 17 Applying Systems Thinking to Frameworks and Models 18 integratedITSM Components 20 IT Leadership 21 Enablers 22 Execution Processes 22 Performance and Improvement 24
Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM 26
Conclusion 31
References 32
III

IV
 Acknowledgements
Professional Designations acknowledges with gratitude the significant contributions of the following individuals to the creation of this book.
Primary Author: Troy DuMoulin
Contributors: Robin Hysick, Samantha Robertson, and Edwin Toh Executive Editors: Fatima Cabral and David Ratcliffe
Managing Editor: Felipe Villegas
Editors: Susanne MacDonald and Juliana Ujka
Design and Typesetting: Bettina Arapi and Elena Davydova

V
 integratedITSM Book Series
This book is a part of a series on integratedITSM. It introduces readers to the concepts of integratedITSM and the three levels of integration.
Other books in the series:
    
VI
 Foreword
“ITSM for the rest of us!”
The term, IT service management, was originated in the early 1980s by leading technology providers, such as HP and IBM. At that time, IT infrastructures were not as reliable as today, and reference materials for how to control the day-to-day, minute-by-minute challenges of these large, complex infrastructures were non-existent.
Nevertheless, the demand was there, and as soon as the first guides for IT processes were published by IBM, the potential for a comprehensive, disciplined, and consistent approach to managing data center operations was realized and came to fruition very quickly.
Since then, numerous iterations for how to manage IT services have evolved and been documented by a variety of groups, each with their motivations. Pink Elephant has been involved since the beginning – initially, as the very first application in our own data center of the UK government’s newly published ITSM guidance in 1989. And then, ever since, we’ve been the most prolific exponent of ITSM knowledge, certifications, and practices.
Through the decades, the opportunity to build upon the initial simple guidance was irresistible, and huge industries of consultants, educators, software suppliers, and other service providers have blossomed.
At Pink Elephant in 2023, we decided it was time to refocus on the core principles of ITSM while, at the same time, leveraging the newer enabling practices that have become so important in driving efficiencies and value.
Here, in this book, you will find an overview of the strategies and tactics we believe are vital to every IT organization that strives to deliver relevant, high-quality services to its internal users and external customers.
We hope you find what’s contained here to be useful and relevant as you proceed through the three levels of integration in your ITSM journey:
1. Integration between your most valued ITSM processes
2. Integration of the enabling practices that make ITSM possible and efficient
3. Integration of the above with the goals and needs of your business
To the many thousands of practitioners and organizations we have interacted with over the past 30 years, and to all the dedicated artisans working at Pink Elephant as well as the friends and partners who have been so willing to share their knowledge and experiences, this book would not be possible without your collaboration and support. Thank you.
There’s no limit to what we can achieve together!
Fatima Cabral CEO, Pink Elephant
Toronto, Canada January 2024

   Introduction
The importance of an integrated and holistic approach to IT service management (ITSM) has grown in recent years due to business reliance on technology and IT services to support digital strategy and goals related to automated business processes’ enablement. In response to this increased urgency and dependency on IT services, it has become business-critical to take a holistic approach to improving IT management processes and reducing business risk while at the same time ensuring agility, resilience, and automation.
However, achieving these goals can be challenging due to the complexity of modern IT environments which are influenced by several internal and external factors, including:
▪ The rapid emergence of disruptive technologies
▪ Increased need for data-driven business intelligence
▪ Business model complexity with increased use of third-party vendors and suppliers ▪ Rising business risks related to cyber threats
▪ Corresponding levels of regulatory and compliance requirements
▪ Competitive pressures to increase speed to market, agility, and resilience
▪ Increased urgency to resolve subject matter knowledge and skills gaps
Each of these drivers, individually and collectively, increases the pressure on IT service providers to increase their organizational collaboration related to IT service management capabilities and processes. In the context of integratedITSM, integrated IT service managementTM refers to how all functional areas within an IT service provider must work collaboratively towards common goals and priorities, rather than operating as independent silo-based areas of technology competence.
   “IT service management is used to ensure IT services meet the stated goals of the business. It is a set of policies, processes, and technologies for implementing, delivering, managing, and improving IT services.”1
  1 Based on materials from “What Is IT Service Management (ITSM)?” Ibm.com. Accessed January 4, 2024.
https://www.ibm.com/topics/it-service-management
 
Introduction 8
The need for velocity
At the World Economic Forum in Davos, Prime Minister Trudeau is quoted saying “The pace of change has never been this fast, yet it will never be this slow again. You are rightly anxious about how quickly our existing business models are being disrupted.”2
These statements accurately and succinctly describe the world of IT management today. The pace of demand for new or changed IT services continues to accelerate much faster than most IT organizations can effectively manage while maintaining legacy systems and growing technical debt from having put off critical maintenance, upgrades, and decommissioning activities. In short, most organizations are facing a critical imbalance between the rate of new work and the rate of supply with their existing capacity and capabilities. This imbalance is forcing organizations to realize that something must change! What took them this far and worked in the past is no longer sufficient to take them further.
The combination of internal and external factors listed earlier with the rising rate of demand increases the pressure on IT service providers to increase their organizational velocity. Velocity = speed with direction, which in this context means that all the functional areas within the service provider domain must work as an integrated whole toward a common objective. The operation of independent silo-based areas of competence, which is currently the structural and cultural norm for most IT service providers today, is a recipe for dysfunction and inefficiency. The combination of all these factors makes a strong business case to adopt and improve key IT service management processes according to best practices. The challenge is what IT framework to use.
IT Service Management Frameworks
Many sources exist that provide slightly different definitions of IT service management. Common threads among many of these sources include:
▪ Providers and consumers ▪ Capabilities and processes ▪ Products and services
▪ Value
There are many IT governance, management frameworks, and standards that describe and define good and best practices for IT management related to the concept of IT service management.
The IT industry is not short on information and/or resources to use for IT management and/or improvement. There is no scarcity of books and reference models, but the industry continues to struggle to find the time, energy, and focus to improve our IT management processes.
The reason for this is not because of a lack of knowledge or tools. The real challenge is a lack of organizational will that is, in part, due to the tyranny of the urgent always taking precedence over the necessary and good – and an IT organizational culture that frequently values independent action over collaboration, shared processes, and tools.
2 World Economic Forum. “Trudeau: The Pace of Change Has Never Been This Fast.” Youtube.com. Last modified January 23, 2018. Accessed January 4, 2024. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTl1YNTNb0g
   
Introduction 9
As stated, the challenge is not about a lack of knowledge. The principles of, and guidance for, IT service management are described and defined across multiple IT management frameworks.
Each definition focuses on the management of the processes, activities, and actions of an IT service provider in support of the goal of creating value for customers in the form of products and services.
Example definitions of IT service management:
▪ “A set of capabilities and processes to direct and control the organization’s activities and resources for the planning, design, transition, delivery, and improvement of services to deliver value” ISO 20000-2018
▪ “IT service management is a set of specialized organizational capabilities for enabling value to customers in the form of services.” ITIL® 4
▪ “IT service management processes aim to transform the service provider's resources into valuable customer services. These services are to be made available at agreed-upon levels of quality, cost, and risk.” YaSM®
▪ “IT service management is the management approach adopted by an organization to deliver value to consumers through quality products and services.” VeriSMTM
▪ “IT service management is the management of all people, processes, and technology that cooperate to ensure the quality of live IT services, according to the levels of service agreed upon with the customer.” MOF
▪ “ITservicemanagementistheentiretyofactivitiesperformedbyanITserviceprovidertoplan, deliver, operate, and control IT services offered to customers.” FitSM
Each of the published ITSM frameworks has similarities and unique value differentiators. Rather than selecting one and ignoring the others, it's better to take an integrated approach to published frameworks and models and to use all or several of them to define an organization’s own practices.
The principle of taking an integrated approach to ITSM is a critical success factor for cohesively leveraging multiple frameworks or models. Rather than treating each framework as a separate entity, integration involves combining the strengths of different frameworks and creating a unified approach. It entails identifying commonalities, eliminating redundancies, and creating a seamless flow between various processes and practices. The integration allows organizations to create a comprehensive and harmonious IT operating model that leverages the best of each framework while avoiding duplication and confusion.
However, it's important to note that blindly adopting a framework will also not support organizational goals. When applying the framework, it is necessary to tailor it to the organization's unique context, culture, and specific needs. This involves modifying processes, tools, and practices to fit the organization's requirements while still adhering to the underlying principles of the framework. This adaptation ensures that the framework becomes a practical and relevant solution for the organization.
integratedITSM takes this blended approach. Rather than coming up with another published framework, it extracts the core truths and best practices common among many IT service management models. It fills in the gaps by taking a holistic approach to all of them and integrating key enabling practices such as Agile project management, DevOps, organizational change management, Lean principles of continuous improvement, and many more.

Introduction 10
The key truth is that in the realm of integratedITSM, no one-size-fits-all framework or model can cater to the diverse needs of an organization's comprehensive IT operating model. Each framework or model has its own strengths, focus areas, and areas of specialized capabilities. Therefore, it is crucial to adopt, tailor, and integrate these frameworks in ways that align with the organization's specific goals and requirements.
The goal of adopting, tailoring, and integrating these frameworks is to meet IT service management’s customer value realization goals. By leveraging the strengths and principles of multiple frameworks, organizations can enhance their ability to deliver value to customers, improve service quality, increase operational efficiency, and drive continuous improvement. The integration of frameworks enables organizations to create a cohesive and comprehensive approach that addresses IT service management's diverse needs and goals.

   Chapter 1: What Is integratedITSM?
Today’s IT professionals and service providers must adopt an integrated perspective and approach to service management focused on supporting business goals and objectives to remain relevant. Narrowly focusing on individual processes or specializing in a specific technology domain is no longer sufficient.
Successful IT service providers begin with understanding business value, mission, and strategic objectives and translate business goals to strategy, as well as planning and prioritizing initiatives and projects.
For example, here is a statement and list of interconnected strategic IT objectives that a senior leadership team would express as an output of planning.
The integrated story – a case study
  As part of our efforts to achieve business objectives such as faster speed-to-market improved service quality, automation, and scalability driven by the objectives of our digital strategy, our organization is working on several high-profile transformation initiatives. These include:
1. Optimizing and value stream mapping our release, deployment, and change management processes to increase flow by using Lean concepts to reduce bureaucracy and waste.
2. Improving our responsiveness using agile working methods and increasing transparency through visual management tools such as kanban boards and agile practices like product backlogs and burndown charts.
3. Implementing DevOps continuous delivery practices and automation to increase standardization, improve security, and automate compliance requirements while providing deployment speed and resilience.
4. Improving the mean time to restore (MTTR) services through a mature end-to-end incident management process integrating our third-party vendors and an enterprise knowledge management strategy.
5. Addressing cultural issues related to silo thinking through organizational change practices and adopting product-focused cross-functional teams.
6. Building transparency and insight into the status of our operations through a holistic and balanced performance management dashboard to ensure focus on continuous improvement and reduction of technical debt.

Chapter 1: What Is integratedITSM? 12
Do these example strategic goals seem reasonable and beneficial? Welcome to the approach and model of integratedITSM!
Defining integratedITSM
integratedITSM is a management system approach that describes how IT needs to work within business goals to achieve business results. It achieves this through applying an integrated and holistic approach to leadership, structure, enabling frameworks, execution processes, and balanced performance management reporting that supports overall business goals at strategic, tactical, and operational levels.
A high-level key component of IT business management:
▪ ITleadership:ProvidesdirectionandguidanceforITbusinessintegrationtodelivervaluetothe business
▪ IT organization: Provides the structure and design of IT and the required functional capabilities that support the delivery of services aligned to business processes and value
▪ Enablers: Represent methods and practices that help IT adopt a customer-centric and value- driven approach to service delivery
▪ Execution processes: Enable IT to deliver valuable products and services that meet or exceed customer expectations
▪ Performance improvement and management: Performance and improvement management facilitates the evaluation and assessment of IT performance and value in terms of its contribution to the business vision and goals.
Figure 1: integratedITSM model
   
Chapter 1: What Is integratedITSM? 13
The Three Levels of Integration
integratedITSM involves the application of three levels of integration. While this concept can be thought of as a maturity model or a deployment approach, it is important to note that all three levels of integration need to occur simultaneously and congruently for an organization to achieve its business goals and objectives efficiently and cost-effectively.
Level 1 – Integration of IT service management (ITSM) processes Level 2 – Integration of enablers with ITSM Level 3 – Integration of ITSM with business requirements
Level 1: Integration of ITSM processes
The core or innermost level of integration involves integrating ITSM processes among themselves. At this level, incident management, problem management, change management, release and deployment management, and other ITSM processes must work together seamlessly using shared tools to deliver IT services efficiently and effectively. The integration of these processes ensures that IT services are delivered consistently and on time. For example, the incident management process must integrate with the problem management process to ensure that recurring incidents are resolved permanently.
   Figure 2: The three levels of integration
  integratedITSM = All three levels
 
Chapter 1: What Is integratedITSM? 14
Level 2: Integration of enablers with ITSM
The next level of integration involves integrating ITSM processes with enabling frameworks, methods, and practices such as organizational change management, Lean, Agile Scrum, and DevOps. These practices help to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of ITSM processes and enable the IT organization to quickly respond to changing business needs. For example, integrating the change management process with Agile practices can help the IT organization to deliver changes faster within complex adaptive business systems and environments.
Level 3: Integration of ITSM with business requirements
The highest level of integration involves integrating the IT service organization with the rest of the business functions. Integrated business management promotes a customer-centric and business-focused approach to service management, ensuring that business objectives and requirements drive IT management practices and processes from strategy through to operations. At this level of integration, the business’ governance, vision, values, mission, and strategy drive the IT service provider’s approach to IT service management and third-party service provider integration. This level of integration ensures that IT services are delivered in a way that supports the business goals and objectives. For example, if the business goal is to improve customer satisfaction or to execute its overall digital strategy, the IT organization must align its services to support this goal. However, the adoption of an integrated approach for the first two levels is a critical success factor for the effective and efficient realization of the goals of integrated business management.

   Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory
By far the most important thinking model that has influenced our industry over the last several years and is continuing to build momentum in the IT service management community is the concept of systems thinking.
Systems thinking represents a systemic or holistic approach to value creation that includes understanding how all the parts of the organization work together in an integrated way to deliver value. Systems thinking is a core design principle of most IT management systems and best practice frameworks.
The adoption of the principles of system thinking has been written about by many authors and researchers such as Peter Senge in his book, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. These books have had a major impact on the IT industry as evidenced by the adoption and adaptation of the main tenets of systems thinking by ITSM, Lean, Agile, IT4IT, DevOps, and organizational change management.
Taking a system approach to IT service management includes establishing an understanding of how all the parts of an organization that are made up of different supplier types work together in an integrated way to deliver value. It seeks to create end-to-end visibility of how demand is captured and tracks the flow of work across the system as it translates demand into value.
Systems thinking is a management philosophy that concerns itself with building awareness, understanding, and management of the full set of elements of a defined system. It focuses on the holistic context, linkages, dependencies, and boundaries between the components of the system for alignment and improvement. Drawing from the three pillars of Agile (transparency, inspection, and adaptation), the first critical success factor is to establish transparency to enable inspection and adaptation. Not having the big picture or holistic understanding of the full system will likely generate localized decisions that can potentially negatively impact system velocity. Simply put, you cannot govern or manage what you do not see or understand!
3 Senge, Peter M. The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. 2nd Ed. London, England: Random House Books: 2017, p.59.
   “Systems thinking is a discipline for seeing wholes. It is a framework for seeing interrelationships rather than things, for seeing patterns of change rather than static ‘snapshots.”3
  
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 16
Three key principles required by systems thinking include:
1. Holistic thinking is required to develop an awareness of the full or larger picture of all the elements that make up the full system and its boundaries.
2. Dynamic thinking is required to develop an understanding that the system is constantly being impacted by and evolving through both internal and external drivers that change the system makeup and behaviors over time. Dynamic thinking requires individuals and teams to continually evaluate and understand the system’s current state.
3. Closed-loop thinking is required to develop an understanding of the cause and effect of changes within one part of the system and how it impacts related or downstream system elements and/or practices.
Systems thinking skills
System thinking requires organizations and individuals to develop the skills and abilities to both analyze and synthesize:
▪ Analysis or convergent thinking is focused on the ability to look at a complex concept or object and break it down into its constituent parts for understanding, managing, and improving.
▪ Synthesis or divergent thinking is focused on seeing how seemingly separate things might work together to achieve a collective objective.
When we take a systems view of service management, we shift from optimizing individual parts or processes of the organization toward an integrated approach, optimizing the flow of products and services through integrated ITSMTM processes.

Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 17
Systems Theory Applied to integratedITSM Applying the principles of systems thinking to a business environment, it is logical to conclude that the IT service organization and its related IT management system and operating model are part of a larger business system.
The IT service organization is part of an ecosystem of service organizations that includes finance, human resources, facilities, legal, and other business units. This ecosystem or enterprise management system is made up of various internal and external service providers that must work together to support the overall business or agency to achieve its goals.
Figure 3: Business capability categories
Based on this reasoning, integrated IT service management enablers, frameworks, practices, execution processes, and results must be positioned within the content of a larger business management ecosystem.
Here are some ways in which the IT service organization is part of this ecosystem:
▪ Interdependent relationships: The IT service organization relies on other business units to provide support services such as finance, human resources (HR), legal, and facilities management. Similarly, these business units rely on IT to provide technology solutions and support for their operations. These interdependent relationships require collaboration, communication, and a shared understanding of each other's needs and priorities.
▪ Sharedgoals:Althougheachfunctionandbusinessunitmayhavedifferentobjectivesandgoals, they are all part of a larger organization that shares a common vision and purpose. The IT service organization, finance, HR, legal, and facilities all work toward the same goal of supporting the business and enabling it to achieve its strategic objectives.
▪ Coordinated service delivery: To ensure that the business operates smoothly, services from different business units must be coordinated and integrated. For example, HR and facilities may need IT to provide access to employee data and facilities management systems. In turn, IT may rely on finance to manage budgets and funding for technology projects.
   
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 18
▪ Continuous improvement: Each internal service organization within the business or organizational ecosystem is responsible for continuous improvement in their area of expertise. However, they must also collaborate to identify opportunities for improvement across the entire organization. This requires a culture of open communication, feedback, and shared learning.
▪ Digital strategy: As an overall business policy, all internal service organizations and service partners should embrace innovation and stay up to date with emerging technologies and trends to ensure that it is providing the most effective solutions to the business. This requires a culture of continuous learning and experimentation, as well as a willingness to take calculated risks and embrace new ideas and approaches.
Applying Systems Thinking to Frameworks and Models
One of the primary goals of integratedITSM is to provide a holistic and integrated perspective of the primary components and levels of an IT management system. In short, integrated ITSM and its three levels are fundamentally based on the key tenets of systems thinking.
To that end, there is no shortage within the information technology industry of available best practices and documented how-to guidance; IT as an industry has the advantage of having multiple associations, bodies of knowledge, and best practice libraries. However, as each new framework or model emerges, it typically does so as an isolated set of practices focused on specific parts of the overall IT service management. For example:
▪ IT operations
▪ Architecture
▪ Information security management
▪ Project management
▪ Software development
▪ Business analysis
▪ Continuous delivery
▪ Knowledge management
▪ Service desk
▪ Vendor management
▪ Structured problem-solving
▪ Risk management
▪ Relationship management
▪ Organizational change management ▪ Etc.
There are many models and IT frameworks that provide the IT industry with knowledge that addresses specific areas of capability and specialization. It is not that these frameworks do not each have value or that individually they are not useful. However, due to leadership challenges, silo structures, internal politics, and a lack of alignment and agreement, organizations will often adopt these practices in isolation or, even worse, position them as competitive.
 
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 19
Leaders and service management professionals who practice the systems thinking skill of synthesis realize that the impact and benefit of taking an integrated approach to how these practices work together is far greater than the sum of their parts.
integratedITSM does not seek to replace these models but rather provides a holistic and generalized view of the full set of IT practices and capabilities and describes how they work together. There is no single best-practice model or framework, and it is important to understand that the only way to achieve effective and efficient management of IT in this rapidly evolving and dynamic system is to combine the available management practices and standards to achieve the best results.
To use a metaphor, our current IT environment is complex with many moving and connected pieces. In many ways, it is a puzzle we are trying to piece together and solve. The goal of integrated ITSM is to provide the image on the puzzle box that allows organizations, leaders, and IT service management professionals to connect the parts that exist, identify the parts that are missing, and improve the overall picture for optimized business and customer value.
Integrating IT service management frameworks
As described the principles and processes of IT service management can be understood as part of the overall IT business management approach. A key tenet of IT business management is that there is no one-size-fits-all framework or model that can cater to the diverse needs of an organization's comprehensive IT operating model. Each framework or model has its strengths, focus areas, and areas of specialized capabilities. Therefore, it is crucial to adopt, adapt, and integrate these frameworks in a way that aligns with the organization's specific goals and requirements.
Adopting frameworks involves understanding their core principles, methodologies, and practices, and leveraging them to improve IT service management. Organizations can choose to adopt frameworks such as FitSM (Federated IT Service Management), COBIT (Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies), ISO/IEC 20000 (International Standard for IT Service Management), or other industry- specific frameworks. These frameworks provide a solid foundation and proven practices for managing IT services effectively.
However, it's important to note that blindly adopting a framework will also not support organizational goals. Adapting the framework is necessary to tailor it to the organization's unique context, culture, and specific needs. This involves tailoring processes, tools, and practices to fit the organization's requirements while still adhering to the underlying principles of the framework. This adaptation ensures that the framework becomes a practical and relevant solution for the organization.
Integration is a critical aspect of leveraging multiple frameworks or models cohesively. Rather than treating each framework as a separate entity, integration involves combining the strengths of different frameworks and creating a unified approach. It entails identifying commonalities, eliminating redundancies, and creating a seamless flow between various processes and practices. The integration allows organizations to create a comprehensive and harmonious IT operating model that leverages the best of each framework while avoiding duplication and confusion.

Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 20
The ultimate goal of adopting, adapting, and integrating these frameworks is to meet the customer value realization goals of IT service management. By leveraging the strengths and principles of multiple frameworks, organizations can enhance their ability to deliver value to customers, improve service quality, increase operational efficiency, and drive continual improvement. The integration of frameworks enables organizations to create a cohesive and comprehensive approach that addresses the diverse needs and goals of IT service management.
integratedITSM Components
The ISO Standards Council defines a management system as:
A management system is the way in which an organization manages the interrelated parts of its business to achieve its objectives. These objectives can relate to several different topics that include product or service quality, operational efficiency, environmental performance, health, and safety in the workplace, and many more.
The benefits of an effective management system for an organization:
▪ A more efficient use of resources and improved financial performance
▪ Improved risk management and the protection of people and the environment
▪ An increased capability to deliver consistent and improved services and products, thereby
increasing value to customers and all other stakeholders.4
The section provides an overview of each of the key components of the IT business management systems approach.
Figure 4: The integratedITSM model
4 International Organization for Standardization (ISO). “Management System Standards.” ISO.org, 2022. Accessed January 5, 2024. https://www.iso.org/management-system-standards.html
     
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 21
The key components of the integratedITSM picture:
Figure 5: integratedITSM components
IT Leadership
IT leadership plays a crucial role in establishing the organization’s strategic direction and planning – including its values, vision, and mission, as well as cultivating a culture – that all aligns with business and customer objectives.
IT leaders prioritize customer needs by developing a customer-centric mindset within the IT service organization. They work closely with business stakeholders to understand customer expectations, pain points, and desired outcomes.
IT leaders set the direction by defining a clear vision and strategy for the IT department in line with the organization's overall goals. They collaborate with senior executives and key stakeholders to understand business objectives, technological trends, and customer expectations. Through this collaboration, they identify opportunities to leverage technology and align products and services to business needs.
Effective IT leaders develop comprehensive plans that translate the strategic vision into actionable initiatives. They assess the organization's current IT capabilities, identify gaps, and prioritize projects based on their alignment with business and customer objectives.
IT leadership also plays a crucial role in fostering a culture that supports business and customer objectives. They promote collaboration and effective communication across teams that breaks down silos and encourage cross-functional cooperation. IT leaders also focus on talent management, attracting and retaining skilled professionals who possess the necessary technical expertise and align with the organization's values. They create an environment that encourages innovation, risk-taking, and continuous learning, which fosters a culture of agility and adaptability.
   
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 22
Enablers
Enablers critical to integrated IT service management include frameworks, methodologies, and practices that emphasize customer focus, agility, resilience, and value. These enablers, such as organizational change, key relationship management roles, Lean, Agile, and DevOps, go beyond process optimization to support long-term success. By leveraging these enablers, proactive service organizations can effectively achieve their goals and deliver value to customers.
Enablers are critical components that play a significant role in the success of integrated ITSM initiatives. While process optimization is important, enablers provide the necessary tools, frameworks, methodologies, and practices to create a customer-centric and value-focused approach.
Key relationship roles play a critical part as a key enabler of the IT business management approach that focuses on nurturing relationships with stakeholders including customers, vendors, and internal teams. By establishing, nurturing, sustaining, and improving internal and external relationships through IT service management processes, IT service organizations can strengthen partnerships, improve communication, and align IT services with business objectives. Effective relationship management enhances collaboration, facilitates service level agreement (SLA) management, and supports overall integrated ITSM success.
Key roles in relationship management include:
▪ Business relationship managers ▪ Product and service owners
▪ Vendor relationship managers ▪ Service delivery managers
Execution Processes
An IT service organization depends on its key execution and operational processes to achieve customer and strategic goals that support business results.
The IT service organization’s execution processes consist of strategic, tactical, and operational processes that must collaborate to support customer goals and objectives. Strategic processes focus on aligning IT services with long-term business objectives, prioritizing investments, and ensuring the overall direction is in line with customer needs. Tactical processes bridge the gap between strategy and operations by translating strategic goals into actionable plans, resource allocation, and project management. Operational processes are responsible for day-to-day execution, incident management, problem resolution, and service delivery, which ensure that customer expectations are met promptly and effectively. The successful integration and coordination of these processes enable IT service organizations to deliver value, enhance customer satisfaction, and achieve desired business outcomes.
The effective execution of key processes within an IT service organization ensures prompt incident resolution, reliable service delivery, and customer satisfaction. Operational processes align IT services with strategic goals, mitigate risks, and support business continuity. By emphasizing continuous improvement, organizations can enhance service quality, optimize resource allocation, and consistently deliver value to customers, thereby supporting business results.
  
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 23
Examples of key strategic, tactical, and operational processes necessary for effective IT service management include but are not limited to:
▪ Business relationship management: Business relationship management involves maintaining positive relationships with business stakeholders to understand their needs and align IT services with business objectives.
▪ Servicelevelmanagement:Servicelevelmanagementisresponsibleforestablishing,monitoring, and ensuring that IT services meet agreed-upon service level agreements (SLAs) and performance standards.
▪ Incident management: Incident management focuses on resolving and restoring IT services to normal operation after disruptions or incidents, such as system failures or service outages.
▪ Problem management: Problem management aims to identify and address the root causes of recurring incidents and prevent them from happening again in the future.
▪ Knowledge management: Knowledge management involves capturing, organizing, and sharing IT-related knowledge and information to enhance problem-solving and decision-making within the organization.
▪ Request management: Request management handles user requests for IT services, such as software installations or access permissions, ensuring efficient and consistent handling of service requests.
▪ Servicecatalogmanagement:Servicecatalogmanagementestablishesandmaintainsacatalogof available IT services to support overall relationship management and makes it easier for users to request and understand the services provided by IT.
▪ Change management: Change management supports the assessment, scheduling, and authorization of changes to IT systems, processes, and infrastructure to minimize risks, and disruptions, and ensure service availability.
▪ Release and deployment management: Release and deployment management coordinates the planning, testing, and deployment of IT releases or updates into the production environment.
▪ Service assurance and testing: Service assurance and testing involve verifying that IT services and components meet quality and performance standards, ensuring they deliver the intended value.
▪ Monitoring and alerting: Monitoring and alerting tools and processes are used to continuously observe the performance of IT services, systems, networks, and applications, and send alerts when issues arise.
▪ Vendor management: Vendor management is responsible for managing relationships with external IT service providers and vendors, including contract negotiation, performance monitoring, and compliance management.
▪ IT asset management: IT asset management involves tracking and managing an organization's IT assets, including hardware, software, and licenses, to optimize asset utilization and reduce costs.
▪ Configuration management: Configuration management focuses on maintaining accurate records of an organization's IT infrastructure components, their relationships, and configurations to support effective IT operations and changes.
▪ Etc.

Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 24
These IT management processes as well as other processes that are not listed in these examples play an essential role in supporting the execution, effectiveness, and efficiency of IT services within an IT service provider organization.
Performance and Improvement
Continuous improvement is a philosophy found in many management frameworks and models that emphasizes the continual and ongoing improvement of processes, products, and services. It is based on the Lean principle that even small and consistent improvements can have a significant impact over time and that organizations should strive to continuously improve to remain competitive and meet the evolving needs of customers.
IT leaders establish expected results through strategy and planning activities and identify key performance indicators (KPIs) and metrics to measure the success of initiatives as well as process capabilities. They use this information to conduct regular reviews and adjust plans to ensure they remain aligned with evolving business needs.
The second law of thermodynamics is a fundamental principle in physics that states all complex systems will decay into disorder over time without intentional energy and effort being applied to reverse this process. In the context of IT service management, the application of the second law of thermodynamics is relevant to the management of information systems, products, and services.
This principle highlights the need for the continuous measurement of performance and results against goals to identify continual improvement opportunities and actions. A focused effort on continual improvement is therefore a critical practice to combat the principle of entropy and is crucial for maintaining both effectiveness and relevance in any management system. Establishing a performance management system and continual improvement practices involves a commitment to regularly evaluate and refine processes, products, and services to ensure that they continue to meet the evolving needs of the organization and its stakeholders.
By embracing the principle of fighting entropy drift and applying continuous improvement practices, organizations can avoid stagnation and ensure that their business and operating models remain effective, efficient, and responsive to change over the long term.
In the context of integratedITSM, the application of these concepts requires an intentional focus on three levels:
▪ Level 1 – Integrated IT service management processes
▪ Level 2 – Integrated enablers, frameworks, and practices ▪ Level 3 – integratedITSM
Effective execution processes provide insights into results through metrics, KPIs, and service reviews, which enable organizations to identify areas for enhancement and drive service quality improvements. The results of execution processes support data-driven decision-making that enables organizations to monitor service performance, optimize resource allocation, and identify opportunities for continual improvement.
 
Chapter 2: Systems Thinking and Systems Theory 25
Intentional integration of key enablers allows organizations to develop synergies between the various IT management approaches supporting speed to market, Agile project management, and adoption of emerging technologies while supporting workforce and talent management through effective organizational change.
Monitoring results against intended goals is one of the key activities of IT governance. The principle and practice of continuous improvement supports governance objectives as a philosophy that emphasizes the ongoing pursuit of excellence with a focus on iterative and incremental improvements to processes, products, and services. All three levels of measurement are necessarily interrelated and symbiotic. Effective performance management and monitoring provide the data and insights necessary for improvement initiatives and continuous improvement efforts driving the need for ongoing monitoring and evaluation.

   Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM
The goal of using a holistic, integrated approach in IT business management is to support overall business objectives. This approach allows IT service organizations to understand and improve the performance of key aspects of their management system. Key benefits include:
Performance data integration brings together data from different IT management areas (such as incident, asset, change, and configuration management), offering a complete view of IT operations and performance.
Timely insights: Continuous data collection and analysis from various IT processes provide in-depth and comprehensive insights into IT service performance and usage, aiding in swift and informed decision-making.
Enhanced customer and user experience: Insights into service performance help ensure that IT services meet customer and user expectations, contributing to improved service and customer satisfaction.
Transparency and accountability: This approach promotes open access to information and holds people accountable by documenting actions within IT management processes, crucial for governance.
Risk management: By offering a complete view of the IT environment, it helps in identifying and addressing potential risks and vulnerabilities, crucial for IT governance.
Efficiency and cost reduction: Integration streamlines processes and enhances automation, reducing duplication and manual efforts. This leads to greater efficiency and potential cost savings, aligning with business goals of maximizing value.
When implementing an integrated approach to integratedITSM, it's important for an organization to align its performance measurement system with all three levels of IT business management.
 
Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM 27
Level 1 – the integrated IT service management processes
Integrated IT service management (ITSM) processes bring significant benefits by offering clear, data- driven insights for better decision-making. Key areas such as incident, problem, change, and service level management are measured to understand and enhance operational efficiency. For instance, analyzing incident resolution times or service disruption frequencies helps pinpoint and address ITSM process inefficiencies. This leads to higher service quality and more reliable uptime.
Tracking metrics like service availability, customer satisfaction, and service level achievements shows the direct impact of ITSM on improving revenue, cutting costs, and retaining customers. It's crucial to not only measure individual ITSM processes but also their integration—how effectively they interconnect and function together. This integration is vital because the effectiveness of ITSM depends on the smooth interaction of various processes.
Measurable benefits gained from integrated ITSM processes:
▪ Reduced cycle time: The amount of time it takes to complete a process can be reduced by identifying bottlenecks and inefficiencies in the process and implementing improvements.
▪ Reduced lead time: The amount of time between the customer input and the process output; in other words, the time to value for the customer
▪ Improved quality: Measuring process performance can help identify defects or errors in the process and allow for improvements to be made to reduce or eliminate them.
▪ Increased productivity: By identifying areas where work can be streamlined or activities can be automated, productivity can be increased.
▪ Improved resource utilization: Identifying areas for standardization and automation to reduce human effort, waste, or underutilized resources can lead to better resource utilization and value creation for the customer.
▪ Improved customer satisfaction: Customer satisfaction can be improved by identifying and addressing areas where customers are experiencing delays or dissatisfaction.
▪ Reduced costs: Measuring process performance can help identify areas where costs can be reduced such as by eliminating waste, improving efficiency, or reducing errors.
▪ Improved predictability and estimation: Improving the standardization and maturity of a process allows the organization to make more accurate decisions and plans related to resource utilization, scheduling, and acquisition.

Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM 28
Level 2 – integrated enablers
At its second level, integratedITSM combines key elements like ITSM (IT service management), Agile, Lean, and organizational change management (OCM) to boost organizational efficiency, speed, flexibility, and resilience. Each component plays a crucial role in creating a comprehensive approach to managing IT products and services.
▪ ITSM: Provides a structured framework for efficient and effective delivery of IT services
▪ Agile: Offers a flexible and collaborative approach to product development and project management, adapting quickly to changes
▪ Lean: Focuses on speeding up delivery, reducing waste, and enhancing efficiency, streamlining
processes to maximize customer value
▪ OCM:Ensuresthatchangeismanagedinclusivelyandeffectively,adaptingtomarketshifts,new
technologies, and evolving customer demands. It emphasizes continuous improvement, innovation, and teamwork.
Together, these practices ensure continual improvement. Lean, in particular, offers practical methods for process optimization and waste reduction, complementing both ITSM and Agile. It's about choosing how to implement change — doing it with people rather than imposing it on them. An inclusive approach to change leads to better outcomes and higher satisfaction.
Measurable benefits gained from integrated enablers include:
▪ Increased efficiency: Integrated enablers and Lean practices aim to eliminate waste and streamline processes that result in increased efficiency and productivity. By adopting these practices, organizations can reduce the time and effort required to perform work, enabling them to achieve more with less.
▪ Improved effectiveness: Using enablers and practices such as Agile, business relationship management, and organizational change management, the IT service organization improves its ability to work effectively with its stakeholders and customers to co-create value through collaborative and interactive development techniques.
▪ Faster time to market: Agile and iterative project management approaches aim to accelerate the development and delivery of products and services to respond more quickly to changing customer needs and market conditions. By adopting these methods organizations can bring products and services to market faster, gaining a competitive advantage.
▪ Enhanced customer satisfaction: By adopting these integrated enablers, frameworks, and practices, organizations can better understand their customers’ needs and preferences to deliver products and services that meet or exceed customer expectations.
▪ Improved risk management: By applying an integrated and structured approach to adopting these practices, organizations can reduce the likelihood and impact of risks, ensuring business continuity and protecting against potential losses.
▪ Improvedresilienceandrecoverytimes:Theserviceorganizationcanimprovetherecoveryand return to operations’ time frames through the application of automated configuration management, version control, release and deployment strategies, and automated DevOps toolchains.

Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM 29
Additional but less quantifiable benefits from taking an integrated approach to enablers, frameworks, and practices will also include:
▪ Enhanced flexibility and adaptability: Agile, Lean, and organizational change practices enable organizations to respond rapidly to changing customer needs and market conditions, adapting, or transforming their operations to stay ahead of the competition.
▪ Improved collaboration and communication: Integration of these practices fosters collaboration and communication between teams and departments, which leads to improved alignment and more effective problem-solving.
In summary, this level of integratedITSM is about harmonizing various methodologies to achieve higher operational efficiency and adaptability, ensuring that an organization can swiftly respond to new challenges and opportunities.
Level 3 – the integration of IT business management
Success in integratedITSM is chiefly gauged by its alignment with both business and customer expectations, as well as the resulting outcomes. This alignment involves synchronizing IT strategies, planning, and management with overarching business aims and objectives. A key aspect of this process is balancing the four critical perspectives of Lean methodology: the voices of the customer, business, process, and regulator. Each voice offers a unique and essential viewpoint, contributing to a holistic approach to business management.
▪ Voice of the customer: This focuses on understanding and meeting customer needs and expectations. By actively listening to customer feedback and requirements, businesses can tailor their IT services and products to better satisfy their clientele, enhancing customer loyalty and satisfaction.
▪ Voice of the business: This perspective prioritizes the business’s needs, goals, and objectives. Aligning IT management with these aspects ensures that IT initiatives directly contribute to the business’s overall success, supporting growth and profitability.
▪ Voice of the process: This involves streamlining and optimizing business and IT processes. By enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of these processes, organizations can reduce operational costs, minimize waste, and improve service delivery times, thereby boosting overall productivity.
▪ Voice of the regulator: This voice represents compliance with laws, regulations, and standards. Adhering to these guidelines not only avoids legal complications but also instills trust in customers and stakeholders by demonstrating the organization's commitment to integrity and quality standards.

Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM 30
In essence, the primary metrics for evaluating the success of integratedITSM are deeply rooted in how well it aligns and supports the broader goals and needs of the business, its customers, and regulatory environments. This holistic approach not only meets current demands but also positions the organization for future growth and adaptability in a rapidly evolving market. Measurable benefits of integratedITSM:
▪ Improving customer engagement: Leveraging digital technologies such as social media, email marketing, and live chat can help businesses engage with customers more effectively and build stronger relationships, as well as lead to higher conversion rates, increased sales, and loyalty.
▪ Enhancing operational efficiency: Digital products and services that support business process automation, data analytics, and the expansion of customer service channels can help businesses streamline their processes, reduce costs, and improve productivity.
▪ Enablinginnovation:Leveragingrapidprototypingmethodssupportedbyautomationcanhelp businesses design and experiment with new products, services, and business models more quickly and easily than traditional methods.
▪ Improving decision-making: Data analytics tools can provide businesses with insights into their operations, customers, and markets, enabling more informed decision-making.
▪ Enhancing agility and responsiveness: By leveraging automation and monitoring technologies in IT products and services, businesses can be more agile and responsive to changes in the market, which enables them to quickly detect and adapt to new trends and opportunities.
▪ Improved return on investment (ROI): By aligning IT resources with business goals and objectives, organizations can ensure that they are investing in areas that deliver the highest ROI.
▪ Faster time to market: By aligning IT service management with business goals and objectives,
organizations can accelerate the development and delivery of products and services, enabling
them to bring new offerings to market more quickly.
▪ Managed total cost of ownership and percentage of IT spend: By aligning IT service
management and vendor management strategies with business goals and objectives, IT service organizations can control, manage, and potentially reduce unnecessary costs and waste, resulting in a managed total cost of ownership and overall percentage of spend on IT resources.
▪ Improving profitability and earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT): The effective translation and support of business and customer goals to IT governance and strategy processes that are executed by ITSM processes can support profitability and improved EBIT by increasing operational efficiency, expanding the market reach, and enhancing customer engagement, which ultimately leads to increased sales and reduced costs.
In summary, an integratedITSM system supports business and service provider goals by creating insight and transparency into critical elements of IT management. It empowers organizations to govern (evaluate, direct, and monitor) their IT operations effectively, ensuring that IT services are aligned with strategic objectives and governance principles while optimizing performance and reducing risks.

Chapter 3: Measurable Benefits of Integrated ITBM 31
Conclusion
Enhancing business through integratedITSM
integratedITSM stands as a vital methodology for organizations aiming to provide IT services that are not only efficient and effective but also in sync with their overarching business goals and objectives. This approach is more than just an operational strategy; it's a comprehensive framework that intertwines integrated IT service management (ITSM) processes within themselves, across various enabling frameworks and practices, and throughout the broader business landscape.
Integration of ITSM processes: At its core, integratedITSM involves harmonizing various ITSM processes, such as incident management, change management, and service level management. This integration ensures that each process supports and enhances the others, leading to more streamlined and effective IT service delivery.
Alignment with enabling frameworks and practices: The approach also includes aligning ITSM with other key business frameworks and practices, such as Agile, Lean, and project management methodologies. This ensures that IT initiatives are not only technically sound but also aligned with business strategies and market demands.
Synergy with other business functions: Crucially, integratedITSM advocates for a close alignment between IT and other business functions. This ensures that IT strategies and actions directly support business objectives, from marketing and sales to operations and customer service.
As the role of technology in business continues to grow and evolve, the importance of integratedITSM becomes increasingly paramount. This approach is no longer just a competitive advantage but a necessity for any organization looking to thrive in today's fast-paced, technology-driven business environment. By effectively integrating IT strategies and operations with business goals, organizations can not only stay competitive but also pave the way for future innovation and success in meeting the dynamic needs of their customer.
 
   References
“What Is IT Service Management (ITSM)?” Ibm.com. Accessed January 4, 2024.
https://www.ibm.com/topics/it-service-management
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). “Management System Standards.” ISO.org, 2022. Accessed January 5, 2024. https://www.iso.org/management-system-standards.html
Senge, Peter M. The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. 2nd ed. London, England: Random House Books, 2017, p. 59.
World Economic Forum. “Trudeau: "The Pace of Change Has Never Been This Fast.” Youtube.com. Last modified January 23, 2018. Accessed January 4, 2024. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTl1YNTNb0g
    
 integratedITSM
Navigating IT Service Management in the Digital Era
In today's tech-driven business landscape, the urgency for a comprehensive approach to IT service management (ITSM) has never been more critical. integratedITSM addresses this need, emphasizing collaboration, agility, resilience, and automation in the face of disruptive technologies, data- driven intelligence, and cyber threats.
As Canada's Prime Minister Trudeau, speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos, noted, "The pace of change has never been this fast." The book explores the necessity for organizations to align IT management processes with this rapid change, urging a shift from independent actions to collaborative, shared approaches.
Navigating ITSM frameworks, the book recognizes industry struggles and identifies organizational will as a key challenge. It advocates for an integrated approach, showcasing how organizations can eliminate redundancies and create a seamless flow between different IT management processes.
Unlike rigid frameworks, this book promotes a blended and tailored approach that aligns with an organization's unique needs. It highlights the significance of integrating practices like Agile, DevOps, and Lean principles for continuous improvement.
integratedITSM is a pragmatic guide for IT professionals and leaders aiming to thrive in the dynamic landscape of ITSM. It offers a road map for navigating complexity, fostering collaboration, and achieving ITSM excellence in the digital age.




Chapter 1: Integrated Enablers, Frameworks, and Practices In the fast-paced commercial environment where business ambitions seek to adopt emerging technologies to support digital strategy while at the same time focusing on running stable operations, IT service organizations find themselves at a crossroads. To thrive, they're compelled to embrace a value centric, high-speed approach to managing IT services, an approach that demands accelerated value delivery while simultaneously elevating service quality, fostering innovation, and cultivating agility. Amidst the ever-shifting landscape of disruptive technologies and the relentless tide of societal and business changes, IT organizations grapple with an imposing challenge. They recognize the imperative of swift action, striving to hasten the delivery of value while forging stronger connections and collaboration across their internal teams and external service partners. This demands not just speed but collaboration and alignment among people, teams, and the broader network of external service In the quest to navigate these complex and almost paradoxical business goals, many IT service provider organizations have turned to a variety of sources for published IT management practices and models. The good news is that there is no shortage of IT governance, management, and process frameworks, such as COBIT, ITIL, PMBOK, SAFe, and many others which provide valuable guidance and best practices for managing IT services and projects. They offer a structured approach to defining, documenting, and automating processes, aiming to increase efficiency and reduce risks. However, these frameworks alone fall short of addressing the complex challenges faced by IT organizations in today's fast-paced digital Recognizing this limitation, forward-thinking service organizations understand that the path to long term success lies in more than just process optimization and integration. While processes play a crucial role, they are only a piece of the larger picture of an integratedITSM approach. To achieve their goals effectively, IT organizations must leverage enabling methodologies that are focused on business agility, managing organizational change, improved efficiency, and automation while at the same time reducing costs. Technology leadership understands that there are various enablers, frameworks, and models that are critical to the long-term success of these goals. The ability to leverage and integrate practices such as Lean, Agile, DevOps, key enabler roles, and organizational change providers. world. management to name a few.

Chapter 1: Integrated Enablers, Frameworks, and Practices 10 This book focuses on understanding how enablers such as the ones listed here but not limited to support the goals of an integratedITSM approach: Lean: Thinking has significantly influenced all modern IT management frameworks, making it a crucial factor in enabling integratedITSM. Originally derived from the manufacturing industry, these principles prioritize waste elimination, continuous process improvement, and focus on value creation. Through the implementation of Lean practices and value stream mapping, IT service organizations can streamline their operations, minimize Agile: Agile Scrum is another methodology that has gained significant traction in recent years. Agile principles prioritize iterative development, cross-functional collaboration, and rapid response to change. By adopting Agile practices, IT organizations can embrace flexibility and adaptability, empowering teams to deliver value incrementally and respond swiftly to evolving DevOps: Describes a grassroots movement and set of practices that emphasize the integration of development and operations teams, enabling organizations to achieve faster and more reliable software delivery. By fostering a culture of collaboration, automation, and continuous integration and deployment, DevOps empowers organizations to release high-quality software more Key enabler roles: Play a pivotal role as a key enabler of integratedITSM. Collectively they foster a culture of collaboration and integration among essential IT service provider roles. Example roles include product and service owners, business relationship managers, vendor relationship managers, and service delivery managers. When these key roles and others work together with a clear understanding of scope and responsibilities in respect to business relationships this facilitates the alignment of business and IT strategy objectives. Organizational change management: In addition to these methodologies, effective organizational change management is crucial for the successful implementation of any transformation initiative. Change management methodologies provide strategies, tools, and techniques to guide individuals and teams through the process of change, addressing resistance, unnecessary complexity, and elevate customer satisfaction to new heights. customer needs. frequently, reducing time-to-market and enhancing customer experience. building buy-in, and fostering a positive, collaborative, and adaptive culture. integratedITSM  better together While each enabler, framework, and practice, such as Lean, Agile, DevOps, key roles, and organizational change management, brings unique value and benefits to IT service organizations, they are most effective when used together as a comprehensive approach. Integrating these models with ITSM process execution allows organizations to leverage the strengths of each methodology while addressing their respective limitations.

Chapter 1: Integrated Enablers, Frameworks, and Practices Benefits of the Integrated Enablers 11 The following is a list of key benefits that derive from using these models together, yielding better results than relying on them individually: Synergy in complementary practices: Each methodology addresses specific aspects of an IT organizational transformation. Lean focuses on eliminating waste and maximizing value, Agile promotes iterative development and collaboration, DevOps emphasizes cross-functional integration and automation, integration of key roles supports improved engagement and organizational change management facilitates smooth transitions. By combining these methodologies, organizations can benefit from their complementary practices, creating a synergy Holistic approach: Based on the principle of systems thinking applied to integratedITSM. No single model can adequately address the complexity and diversity of these challenges. By using these models together, organizations can take a holistic approach. Adaptability and flexibility: To support business and customer digital strategy IT service organizations need to be adaptive and flexible to respond to rapidly changing customer demands and market dynamics. Each model brings its own set of practices that foster adaptability and Continuous improvement: This is a fundamental principle of many of these models. Lean, Agile, relationship management, and DevOps all prioritize ongoing enhancements and iterative progress. By using these models in conjunction, organizations create a continuous improvement Enhanced value delivery: The ultimate goal of all IT service organizations is to deliver value to customers and stakeholders. Each of these models contributes to value delivery in its own way. While collectively they provide a synergy where the value is greater than the sum of its parts. In summary, using these enablers together provides a comprehensive and balanced approach to integratedITSM. By leveraging the strengths of each enabler, organizations can address a broader range of challenges, adopt a holistic perspective, foster adaptability, and resilience, manage risk, drive continuous improvement, and ultimately deliver enhanced value to their customers. that covers a wider range of challenges and opportunities. flexibility. mindset that permeates the entire organization.

Chapter 2: Lean IT Lean IT is the extension of Lean manufacturing and Lean services principles to the development and management of information technology, products, and services. Its goal is to continuously improve the value delivered by IT organizations to their customers and the professionalism of people working in IT. Lean IT focuses on improving the effectiveness and efficiency of people working within IT, IT processes, and information technology to enable better value delivery to its customers. The Evolution of Lean IT Lean, as a concept, traces its roots back to the world of manufacturing and people's desire to create and produce products. Many of its most iconic elements have their origin in the Toyota Production System (TPS), first introduced and refined in Japan following the Second World War. Toyota revolutionized production contributing to what became known as the Japanese economic miracle" of the post-war years through a shift in focus away from individual machines and their utilization and towards improving the flow of processes from end to end in ways tied directly to customer demand. The three basic elements of the TPS were just-in-time (JIT) production and a focus on quality and continuous. While Toyota's innovations are at the heart of Lean, other frameworks and models have also influenced it over the years, such as Six Sigma  a derivative of Lean that is a disciplined, data-driven approach for eliminating process and variation, from which Lean borrowed the structured, problem-solving cycle DMAIC. As other companies began to apply elements of the TPS, and as it took on new characteristics and continued to borrow from other methodologies, it evolved into what became known as the Lean production system by the late 80s when the term itself was coined in an article by John Krafcik." improvement. The principles of Lean By the mid-90s, researchers James Womack and Daniel Jones would lay out five key principles of Lean in their book Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your Corporation.2 1 Krafcik, John F. "Triumph of the Lean Production System." MIT Sloan Management Review 30, no. 1 (1988): 14. 2Womack, James P., and Daniel T. Jones. Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your Corporation. hips/noowlomnemgiaoemawwMT-iomn.esir London, England: Simon & Schuster, 1996.

Chapter 2: Lean IT 13 Value is defined by the customer ('voice of the customer) and represents the requirements that a customer has regarding a specific product or service delivered. Value is delivered through a value stream. This is an end to-end process triggered by the customer that ensures the delivery of the required value is received as quickly and as efficiently as possible. It is comprised of all tasks and activities used to bring a product or service from concept For a value stream to deliver value, it must have flow. This means that the activities must follow each other with minimal interruptions and minimal intermediate stockpiles of inventory. This means designing the flow SO each unit that enters the flow is carried out to its Value stream to customer and includes all information, work, and Perfection Customer Flow material flows. value Pull conclusion without interruption. It is also vital to understand that the customer can trigger the value stream when the value is required. This is the essence of pull. A Pull Production System is one that explicitly limits the amount of work in process that can be introduced into the system. Nothing is to be produced Finally, Lean aims for perfection. This does not mean that multiple quality controls need to be in place, causing delays. It means that the organizational culture and everyone engaged in the value stream values continuous improvement and how their work is associated with quality requirements. The essence of perfection is doing things right the first time and ensuring continued Although developed in the world of manufacturing in the intervening years, the principles of Lean have been applied to all industry verticals, including the service industries such as healthcare, finance, until the next process requires it. relevance through continuous improvement. human resources, and banking  and then finally to IT. Enabling Integrated IT Service Management with Lean IT Lean provides a set of practical tools, methods, and practices for examining and improving the delivery of customer value holistically across five dimensions. Customer: Lean encourages analysis and investigation to fully determine if customer value is fully understood and to identify it properly to ensure value is actually being delivered. Process: Lean provides tools and approaches for analyzing and better understanding how customer value is delivered through the concept of flow across a value stream, such as value Organization: Lean offers guidance and tools for aligning resources and steering them towards Performance: Lean offers tools for the establishment of more effective key performance indicators (KPIS) and encourages better forms of measurement to ensure the best use of time and the right stream mapping. customer value, such as visual management techniques like kanban. set of skills and knowledge exist to deliver customer value.

Chapter 2: Lean IT 14 Behavior and attitude: Lean offers guidance and approaches for leadership to ensure the right culture and attitudes exist to best support customer value and continue to improve and pursue Lean's emphasis on these dimensions 1 in particular, on process, organization, and performance  can be utilized to improve any ITSM process and to further encourage and support continuous improvement perfection. over time to ensure continued value delivery. Understanding Lean IT Lean is about aligning and streamlining to deliver customer value. Lean's core focus is value, which means understanding who the customer is, and what they value, and ensuring that all work done is aligned to deliver it to them. Therefore, Lean has a very specific way of looking at work. From a Lean perspective, resource utilization or maximization of work is not a metric Lean focuses on identifying and classitying the value of work using the following categories: of value: Being busy is not equal to adding value. Value-add: Activities that directly add value or progress the unit of work toward completion and help achieve desired outcomes from a customer perspective such as providing customer service, developing new applications, and the operational and or delivery activities involved in keeping customers satisfied. Value-added work Necessary non-value-add: Activities that may add value from the perspective of the business, regulators, or other stakeholders and which are necessary for supporting customer value, but which are not directly experienced or valued by Value-add Optimize Minimize Remove Necessary non-value-add Non-value-add should be optimized. Figure 3: Categories of value the customers themselves, such as governance, planning, or supporting functions human resources or finance and accounting activities. Necessary non-value-added work should be minimized as much as Non-value-add: Activities that add no value or distract from value from any perspective. Non-value Going further, Lean considers non-value-add activities to be a waste or a distraction from customer value-focused activities and provides further guidance for better understanding it by identifying three possible. added work should be removed. key types that may exist: Muda, the term used for traditionally understood useless work or waste and talent, and create fluctuations in cost, quality, and speed Mura, the term used for variability which can cause overcomplexity, lead to mismatches in skill

Chapter 2: Lean IT 15 Muri, the term used for overburden, which can cause inflexibility, an inability to scale up or A key Lean tool for analysis of the flow of work, value, and the identification of waste in any process is down, and a lack of responsiveness to changes in customer value value stream mapping and improvement. Customers: 20% from the service delivery manager 80% from problem management Authorized change Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Intake RFC Receive A for a  Plan RFC release release 10 15 45 A 4 Process time > 12 15 75 Wait 12 480 time Processr metrics Seven per week 20 days Change ready for use Step! 5 Hand over to operations 30 45 Input Plan release 260 Output Step 4 Implement A the change change (Design, test, deploy) build, 160 205 Standard time 120 1440 2880 PCE = 352/5284  6.6% Figure 4: An example of a value stream map Lean is about increasing transparency to create flow. To better support alignment and enable flow, Lean encourages maximizing transparency and openness in communication to ensure that incidents and problems surface earlier and opportunities for This can be seen in concepts such as jidoka, which emphasizes the joint principles of making defects visible and empowerment of team members to immediately stop work and remove defects early when an abnormal condition has been detected. In support of this principle, Lean encourages leaders to'go to the gemba', or spend meaningful time in the place where work is done observing and engaging with It is also supported through visual management tools. Visual management involves implementing visual controls in plain sight over text-based controls to ensure that information and data are easier to improvement are seized upon. their team. access, remember, and interpret regularly.

Chapter 2: Lean IT 16 There are many examples of visual management utilized in Lean IT. For example: day boards, week boards, and improvement boards. Board'is a relative term because it simply means a place to find a specific form of visualization. These three boards work together as a system of visual aids to support the goals and objectives of the team. Their purpose is to provide regular updates on progress, create visibility around any blockages, and generate and gather improvement problems that allow them to be identified, classified, and addressed for continuous improvement. Objectives for the week Performance: and progress = 25 Dayl board Problems EEE Week board Problems Improvement board ideas. They work together as a register or a list of Figure5:Visual management tools Another commonly adopted visual management tool is called kanban. Kanban emerged directly from the TPS and is a card-based scheduling system for the enablement of new work initiation, embodying Kanban boards come in a variety of forms which may be either analog or digital. They are comprised of cards, where each card represents a unit of work. They visualize a progression of the process as the cards are moved from left to right. This provides the team and the management with a picture of the current state of work and its progression towards being complete, enabling the faster recognition of bottlenecks and the setting of limits on work in progress which promotes improvements in the flow of work and the principle of pull. keeps people from becoming overwhelmed or overburdened. Vertical lanes labeled with process steps Color-coded cards with details of each work item The capacity of the lane limits work in progress (WIP) TODO DOING DONE Figure 6: An example of a basic kanban board

Chapter 2: Lean IT 17 Lean is about pursuing perfection and encouraging continuous improvement. The principle of pursuing perfection in Lean focuses on continuous improvement, best exemplified by the concept Kaizen is a two-part Japanese word.'Kai', the root, means to change;'zen' for the better. Kaizen specifically targets small-step, incremental change. It encourages a general kaizen mindset at a high level  a cultural norm across the organization in which people understand that it's the job of an individual and the team to identify problems, to pick them up and to own them, to solve those problems and then However, while many IT management models endorse of kaizen. KAIZEN CHANGE FOR THE BETTER to share lessons learned with others. Figure7: The meaning of kaizen continuous improvement, Lean also offers a specific approach and practical techniques that can be applied to continuous improvement projects. One example of this is the kaizen event. Kaizen events consist of five phases starting with a problem statement and progressing toward embedded improvement implementation. As mentioned, this is also known as the DMAIC cycle and has been borrowed from Six Sigma, with the letters standing fori its five phases: define, measure, analyze, improve, and control, as shown below. Define the problem statement: Create an understanding of the problem with everyone involved Define Control mplementation to ensure the sustainability and stability of the improved process: Share the lessons learned Measure the data, gather facts: Validate measurements Control Measure Improve the solution candidates: Develop actions and owners Prioritize and decide Implement actions Figure 8: The DMAIC cycle Analyze the data: Establish the influence factor Identify (root) causes Definel hypotheses Improve Analyze

Chapter 8: Agile Scrum "Agile is an iterative project management style focused on the early delivery of business value, continuous improvement, scope flexibility, team input, and delivering well-tested products that reflect Being agile means shortening the overall development and delivery cycle, decreasing costs associated with development, and increasing quality. Ultimately, Agile development practices deliver on all three customer needs." "3 dimensions of value cost, quality, and speed. The Evolution of Agile In the late 1990s, ITe experienced an application development crisis in which it was struggling to maintain the pace necessary to meet customer objectives in the face of the technological revolution driving increased demand for new software and new IT capabilities within organizations. By 2001, many emerging approaches to rapid application development had proven successful, such as extreme programming (XP), borrowing from a range of methodologies and frameworks that had worked elsewhere including Lean. In February of that year, seventeen of the most well-known developers who had experienced these challenges and had some success addressing them met to discuss their various solutions and find common ground. What emerged was the Manifesto for Agile Software Development, The Agile Manifesto states that its goal is "uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do it." The Agile Manifesto includes the four values indicated to the right.4 Agile development emphasizes rapid iteration with continuous customer inputs. Agile development, or Scrum, is often recognized as a hands-on style used by start-upss. This is because Agile principles emphasize building working software that people can actively use instead of spending a lot of time writing specifications beforehand. In addition, Agile development focuses on cross-functional teams that are empowered to make decisions instead of big hierarchies and compartmentalization by function. commonly referred to as the Agile Manifesto. 3 Layton, Mark C. and Steven J. Ostermiller. Agile Project Management for Dummies, 2nd Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2017. 4] Beck, Kent et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Ward Cunningham, 2001. 5 Sutherland, Jeff. Jeff Sutherland's Scrum Handbook. Scrum Training Institute, 2010.

Chapter 3: Agile Scrum 19 A  E Working software 8 Individuals and interactions Customer collaboration Responding to change Over L X Processes and tools X1 6x Following a plan 22 Contract negotiation Comprehensive documentation Figure 9: Principles of Manifesto for Agile: Software Development The Manifesto for Agile Software Development is based on twelve principles: 1. Customer satisfaction by the early and continuous delivery of valuable software 2. Changing requirements are welcome, even late in development 3. Delivering working software frequently (weeks rather than months) 4. Close, daily cooperation between businesspeople and developers 5. Projects are built around motivated individuals who should be trusted 6. Face-to-face conversation is the best form of communication 7. Working software is the primary measure of progress 8. Sustainable development, able to maintain a constant pace 9. Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design 10. Simplicity, the art of maximizing the amount of'work not done'is essential 11. The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams 12. The team's regular reflections on how to become more effective and to adjust accordingly 6 Beck, Kent et al, 2001.

Chapter 3: Agile Scrum 20 Enabling Integrated IT Service Management with Agile While most associated with the context of software development, Agile practices and particularly Scrum  have since been increasingly utilized in other IT management process areas to create flow and increase the speed of delivery. This is because many areas of ITSM can benefit from its more iterative, Many organizations rely heavily on predictive development models (sometimes known as waterfall" development) which take an entire deliverable through large phases of requirements, design, development, integration, testing, and deployment. Progress flows steadily through linear phases. While this approach may work in a situation where a target state or deliverable is well known it does not work well for work focused on innovation. or customization. The issue with using a predictive approach for this type of work is that customers do not always know their exact requirements going into development, leading to changing requirements, redesign, redevelopment, retesting, and increased costs. IT development projects are also increasingly complex and time-intensive, and therefore traditional approaches create a situation in which the time to market is too long to ensure business value. Adaptive development models, in contrast, are iterative and incremental in their approach to planning, developing, and delivering. These models use collaboration as a foundation of their success. These models are seen as circular and repetitive because they break a large deliverable into smaller, more manageable deliverables, and they also circulate the development through the repeated activity of requirements, design, development, integration, and testing. Deployment is a separate phase that follows In the case of Agile and Scrum, the breakdown and visibility of work are present but without the heavy overhead amounts of detail that traditional project management requires. Scrum seeks to optimize the time spent on work and planning  just in time and just enough versus traditional project management, which spends a significant amount of up-front time planning in advance in an exhaustive and detailed The major value difference between the two approaches is that traditional predictive project management is based on project work that focuses on the replication of well-known solutions where the end can be predicted before work begins. This allows a calculated, controlled, managed, and focused approach that schedules resources and budgets. Traditional development models are still best suited to predictive projects and products where the requirements and scope are fixed, the product itself is firm and stable, and the technology is clearly understood. Traditional development models are also well suited to In contrast, adaptive development models should be considered for situations that involve innovation, creativity, and an unknown end state. Adaptive or Agile methods are the only logical approach to projects and products where requirements and scope will evolve, and/or the product itself will evolve. flexible approach to development and project management. iterative development. way. situations where contracts are involved and are of a fixed price and scope.

Chapter 3: Agile Scrum 21 Understanding Agile Scrum adaptive solutions for complex problems. "7 Scrum is "a lightweight framework that helps people, teams, and organizations generate value through Scrum provides a structure of roles, artifacts, events, and rules for developing products. Scrum is not a defined process, but an empirical knowledge approach driven by observations. Work is done in increments by one or more self-managing, cross-functional, and high-performing teams responsible for Scrum is not limited to a specific process or set of techniques. It is a tramework within which organizations can employ processes and techniques. Like all frameworks, Scrum is best adopted when Various processes, techniques, and methods can be employed within the framework. Scrum wraps around existing practices or renders them unnecessary. Scrum makes visible the relative efficacy of current management, environment, and work techniques SO thati improvements can be made. At the heart of Agile Scrum is the principle of agility  the ability to be dexterous, which could mean the To support that kind of agility, three critical success factors must be performed that are called the three creating and adapting processes within the framework. tailored to an organization's environment. ability to pivot and to be flexible at speed. pillars of Agile: Transparency: The emergent process and work must be visible to those performing the work as well as those receiving the work. With Scrum, important decisions are based on the perceived state of its three formal artifacts. Artifacts that have low transparency can lead to decisions that diminish value and increase risk. Transparency enables inspection. Inspection without transparency is Inspection: The Scrum artifacts and the progress toward agreed goals must be inspected frequently and diligently to detect potentially undesirable variances or problems. To help with inspection, Scrum provides cadence in the form of its five events. Inspection enables adaptation. pointless. Scrum events are designed to (O2 TRANSPARENCY 9 @ INSPECTION O ADAPTATION @ Everyone involved in an Agile project has open access to information, creating at trust environment. enriched Frequent and diligent inspection to detect potentially undesirable variances or problems Improvements and changes are made as soon as possible to minimize further deviation. misleading and wasteful. Inspection without adaptation is considered Figure 10: The three pillars of Agile provoke change. Schwaber, Ken and Jeff Sutherland. The Scrum GuideTM, the Definitive Guide to Scrum: The Rules of the Game. Scrum.org, 2020. Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Chapter 3: Agile Scrum 22 Adaptation: If any aspects of a process deviate outside acceptable limits or if the resulting product is unacceptable, the process being applied or the materials being produced must be adjusted. The adjustment must be made as soon as possible to minimize further deviation. Adaptation becomes more difficult when the people involved are not empowered or self-managing. A Scrum team is expected to adapt the moment it learns anything new through inspection. The Scrum process is illustrated in the graphic below. The Scrum process Product backlog refinement Sprint planning Product backlog Daily stand-up Sprint Demo review Sprint retrospective DONE Sprint 1-4 weeks Iteration Sprint backlog Usable increment Figure 11: The Scrum process On the left-hand side, there is a product backlog that contains all the various forms of demand. The backlog needs to be constantly refined, reordered, and reprioritized by the product owner. Every At the beginning of a sprint  a period between one to four weeks maximum 1 thereis a planning meeting. This is a meeting where the Scrum team pulls from the top of the backlog the amount of work that is Then, work is further broken down into tasks, and those tasks are assigned to individual roles. Since now everyone knows the roles and dependencies, and throughout this one-to-four-week process, there is a daily 15-minute stand-up meeting where the Scrum team gets together and talks about the three statements: Each individual's: report on what was done yesterday, what is planned for today, and if there are any roadblocks. Hence, the team reviews the challenges and ways to overcome them daily. day, as new work arrives, it must be re-sequenced in priority. believed doable within the sprint.

Chapter 3: Agile Scrum 23 At the end of the sprint, there are two events, or ceremonies: 1. The sprint review, or demo, with the customer when the output of the sprint is demonstrated to the customer and feedback is sought around the current outcome. It is through transparency, inspection, and adaptation that new ideas, new thoughts, and feedback will then drive changes, 2. Before a new sprint has started, the team must follow the discipline ofl having a sprint retrospective meeting where they look at the continuous improvement and lessons learned for the next sprint period. Using transparency, inspection, and adaptation principles, what went well, what didn't, and what needs to be done differently in the next sprint are analyzed. possibly in scope. Scrum at-a-glance The Scrum framework, as described in the Scrum Guides, consists of the Scrum team and their associated accountabilities, the Sprint which is a container for all other events, and three key artifacts. Each element of the framework serves a specific purpose that is essential to the overall value and results realized with Scrum. (Sprint execution is not a formal event in Scrum, thus the difference in its appearance in the graphic.)  Product owner a 1e Scrum Master Developers Product backlog refinement Sprint Sprint planning Sprint execution Daily Scrum Sprint review 8 Sprint retrospective Scrum team Events Product backlog Sprint backlog Usable increment Artifacts Figure 12: The Scrum framework There is no particular order for adopting the tramework pieces, and no sequence should be read into the framework elements. Like all practice frameworks, Scrum is an integration of all its elements. It is important to note that changing the core design or ideas of Scrum, leaving out elements, or not following the rules of Scrum, covers up problems and limits the benefits of Scrum, potentially even rendering it useless. 8 Schwaber and Sutherland, 2020.

Chapter 3: Agile Scrum 24 The Scrum process has a set of roles, events, and artifacts. Roles include: A] product owner who owns the accountability for the product lifecycle, and the product backlog A Scrum Master whose role will be described later as the coach or process owner for the Scrum The developers, or the individual subject matter experts, who are assembled as a cross-functional team to accomplish the goal, contributing their specializations to the sprint completion. Among events, there is the sprint and its additional events: sprint planning, daily Scrum, sprint review, and sprint retrospective. There is also sprint execution which, while mentioned, is not an official Scrum The goal of the events, sometimes called ceremonies, is to minimize the amount of time spent on those activities that are necessary but not directly contributing to forward progression, mostly necessary non value. This: is to follow the Lean principle to optimize the individual team's time on value-adding, value Finally, there are specific artifacts like the product backlog that is constantly groomed, the sprint backlog, which is the backlog of work for this specific period, and usable increments, which are defined in part event. progressing work. by what's called a definition of done.

Chapter 4: Organizational Change Management Organizational change is simply stated as moving from the old way of doing things (the old way of working, the old identity, the old management structure, etc.) to a new way. But not to be fooled by the simple statement (old to new,) organizational change is hard, not easy. The goal of moving from the old way to a new way is to achieve positive outcomes for the organization; for example, products and services are delivered faster, customer and user engagement is enhanced, internal work processes are more effective and efficient, and both customers and employees are happier. However, a positive outcome is not always achieved. The Evolution of Organizational Change Management (OCM) William Bridges in his best-selling book, Managing Transitions: Making the Most ofChange, emphasizes the difference between what is changing and the normal human response to the personal changes that he calls transitions, which people need to make in response to the change. Bridges defines them as: Change is situational; for example, the move to adopt integrated IT service management capabilities and process improvements requires changes to reporting structure, roles and skills, processes, new Transition is psychological; it is a three-phase process that people go through as they internalize and technology, and possibly suppliers. come to terms with the details of the new situation that the change brings about.9 These phases are: 3. Ending: Involves letting go of the old ways and familiarities. It's about acknowledging and accepting that the current situation or state is coming to an end. During this phase, individuals may experience a range of emotions such as resistance, denial, sadness, and anxiety. They may 4. Neutral zone:. Also known as the in-between'phase. This phase is characterized by ambiguity, disorientation, and a lack of clarity. The old ways have ended, but the new ways or structures grieve the loss of the old ways and feel uncertain about what lies ahead. have not yet fully taken shape. 9] Bridges, Susan, and William Bridges. Managing Transitions, 25th Aniversary Edition: Making the Most of Change. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Lifelong Books, 2017.

Chapter 4: Organizational Change Management 26 Individuals may feel unsettled and may experience a sense of loss or confusion during this phase. However, the neutral zone is also a period of opportunity for exploration, creativity, and experimentation. It is a time to reflect, learn, and adapt to the changes taking place. 5. New beginning: This is where individuals start to embrace and integrate the changes into their lives. In this phase, individuals begin to gain clarity about the new direction, purpose, and ways of doing things. They start to develop new routines, roles, and relationships. The focus shifts from the past to the future, and individuals experience a renewed sense of energy, motivation, It's important to note that these phases are not linear and can overlap or fluctuate in duration and intensity. People may progress through the phases at different speeds, and their experiences may vary. Recognizing and understanding these phases can help individuals and organizations navigate transitions more effectively, support individuals through the emotional and psychological aspects of and commitment. change, and facilitate a smoother transition process. The technical side and people side of projects Change is (always) about moving from a current state (the way things are done now) to a future state (the new way). In between the two is a transition state that might be long or short depending on the change. In many cases, the structure for these changes is provided through a defined project to design, In most cases, this change or these changes impact people. Employees will need to do their jobs differently to get to the future state. Depending on the nature of the change(s) or the scope of the change, this may affect a few people to hundreds, ifi not thousands, of people. The impact on people can be small, large, or somewhere in between. Organizational change management complements project management by focusing on the people side of change. Organizational change management activities help support people through the transition(s) needed to embrace, adopt, and use what has been changed.10 develop, and deliver what is being changed. What is organizational change management? There is no universal best-practice definition for organizational change management. As a discipline, organizational change management draws from psychology, sociology, organizational development, leadership practices, management practices, learning and development, and other domains. Regardless Organizational change management is defined as a business discipline focused on the people side of An organizational change management discipline and practice are needed whenever an organization undertakes a program or project that changes the way people work, their roles and responsibilities, and their working relationships with their teams or their management  as well as how the organization's of the many definitions that exist, all include a focus on the people side of change. change. strategy, business model, operating model, or culture are impacted. 10 Creasey, Tim. "Change VS. Change Management" Prosci.com (blog), Prosci, last modified August 8, 2023, accessed January 8, 2024. htps/syoxw.prosci.combiogcbenge-s-cbechange-management

Chapter 4: Organizational Change Management 27 Enabling Integrated IT Service Management with OCM Most IT service management projects require people to work or behave differently. These may be small, medium, or large changes and some may include changes for the business users of the IT products and When we introduce IT service management processes or make improvements to our existing processes, we may need to create new reporting structures, jobs and job titles, new roles, new skill profiles, and new team and individual performance measures. Tools may change, including asking groups to abandon the tools they have used and start using the new tools, process activities may change which, for example, All of these are changes to our current way of doing things. Organizational change management enables an integrated approach to IT service management processes by providing the discipline to help people Organizational change management helps organizations realize success with any size change. Without this discipline, many integrated IT service management fail to realize the expectations and outcomes of John Kotter and several other researchers and authors have cited failure rates for projects of all types. Integrated IT service management projects are not immune to the statistics described by these authors. In 1996, John Kotter said, "More than 70 percent of needed change either fails to be launched.. [or] to be completed"; and "the same appalling 70 percent figure" for change failure. It's suggested this was a'finger in the air estimate'that gained remarkable traction. However, further research has added more In 2014, the Business Technology Association (BTA) studied 13 major change projects and found the same disappointing 30% success rate. That the success rate has remained unchanged for a generation, with no services. may cause more rigor in how certain tickets are entered, updated, and maintained. through their personal and psychological transitions. the management and teams responsible for implementing the changes. evidence to Kotter's estimate. shortage of analysis and learning available on the topic, is remarkable. 11 Understanding Organizational Change Management Change models Organizational change applied to an integrated approach to ITSM provides organizations and leaders with a focus and understanding of what needs to be done when implementing and leading a change This integrated approach requires an understanding of the Level-3 integrated business management priorities before taking any action. Based on governance and strategy planning the organization's business objectives must first be clarified. Current priorities, the financial climate feasibility, strategic initiatives, etc. should all be taken into consideration before launching a new change initiative. initiative. 11 Cruise, David. "Why Do 70% of Business Transformation Projects Fail, 20 Years after Kotter?" Changeassociates.com, Last modified September 29, 2021. Accessed January 8, 2024. hitps/changeassodiates.com/why-si-70-ocbusines:iransformation.oroiectejal-20-xears-alfter-kotterl

Chapter 4: Organizational Change Management 28 Connecting all activities to the business's goals will help keep leaders on track with achieving their A key consideration is that the change should go beyond simply achieving a goal  it should become An integrated approach to organizational change management provides a structured approach to leading a change initiative. Stage 1 is where the need for change is identified, the vision and strategy for what is changing are agreed upon, the business case for the project is approved, and the project team is chartered. From there, stages 2, 3, and 4 address the people side of change (organizational change management) while continuing to align with the technical side of change (project management). objectives. embedded within the culture and practices of the organization. Input: Change drivers  CSI (PDCA), SWOT, contingency plans Output: Operational, the change STAGE1 Business objectives change Clarify and Need for align STAGE4 STAGE2 2 Change management plan Results New Validate and sustain behavior Plan and Change approach readiness STAGE3 Involve and inform Engage and Empower implement action Figure 13: The 20/20 Change Model The key elements of this diagram: The arrow coming into the diagram represents a business opportunity or challenge that is driving the need for change. Does it provide the trigger for embarking on a change initiative?

Chapter 4: Organizational Change Management 29 Stage 1: The problem or opportunityis: further explored, and iti is agreed that there: is a good and probably urgent reason to proceed further. Solutions to resolve the problem that includes what needs to change (i.e., organization, process, technology) are identified. A strategic change team (what John Kotter calls a guiding coalition") is formed, and a vision, strategy, and road map are developed. Finally, a project team that includes an organizational change management team is chartered and ready to move into the next Stage 2: The organizational change management team creates the change management plan and begins to communicate the change vision. The team identifies and analyzes stakeholders as well as developing communication and learning strategies and plans. This phase ends with a change readiness assessment: Is the organization ready to lead and manage the change initiative, are there any gaps, and how will they Stage 3: The plans from stage two are executed during the'engage and implement stage. There is close alignment with the large-scale project planning to know what technical changes are being delivered and when. These changes are. likely occurring in a phased approach, and feedback from one phase to the next Stage 4: As the technical changes are being implemented, and the old way is replaced by the new way, newly introduced activities can help people who have adapted to the change to keep moving forward in their change journey. The goal is to sustain the changes in the organization as evidenced by new behaviors and attitudes. It is in this stage that the changes are validated in that they have delivered the This diagram is circular with the forward direction going from stage to stage along with backward feedback to ensure constant reviews and updates, which will ensure overall success. At some point, the stage. be addressed? is being used to review and update the plans first developed in stage two. expected outcome for the organization. change initiative will be over as indicated by the arrow leaving the circular flow. 12 Kotter, John. "The 8-Step Process for Leading Change." Kotterinc.com, Kotter International Inc. Kotter International, Last modified April 7, 2022. Accessed January 8, 2024. btps/orwwcbosscrinc.com/methoslolog/ steps/

Chapter 5: DevOps DevOps is a movement represented by the convergence of existing IT best practices from ITSM plus Lean, and Agile into a development and operations approach that supports automation. and continuous delivery. It also encourages a culture of collaboration and learning to help IT deliver business value better, faster, and cheaper than ever before. The Evolution of DevOps DevOps, a term representing a blending of the words development and'operations', first arose in response to conversations in the IT community related to addressing conflicts between developers and system administrators in the mid-2000s. These conflicts had emerged due to gaps in values, culture, and practice between traditional waterfall development approaches and newer agile approaches such as scrum used by developers which were not always inclusive of the needs or capacity of those in operations. As open-source toolsets also began to be used more widely and attract attention, it created a perfect storm in which various converging adjacent methodologies for addressing this conflict and While DevOps is primarily known as an enabler of greater automation, the main principles of the DevOps movement extend beyond that. DevOps builds upon Lean and agile principles to advocate for the breaking down of silos between traditional development and operations teams. The goal of DevOps is to create a culture of cross-functional teaming and increased collaboration while implementing the kind of standardization and optimization that are ultimately required to properly support meaningful automation that drives value at the necessary speed of today's ongoing digital transformation. To dot this, resulting challenges of speed, flow, and automation became known as DevOps. it must look at the full stack of culture, practices, and automation together.

Chapter 5: DevOps 31 Implementing automation and improved measurement through: new tools and toolchains Automation Integrating elements of Lean, Agile, and ITSM to improve efficiency and workflow Practices Creating a culture of collaboration and communication. Culture 7 #7T T Figure 14: The Full Stack of DevOps Enabling Integrated IT Service Management with DevOps When implemented across the full stack, DevOps is focused on many of the same areas as Lean and Agile standardization, optimization, and creating a culture of better collaboration towards the goal of increasing speed and flexibility without compromising customer value. What DevOps adds is a specific emphasis on improving the communication between development and operations to ensure continual delivery and minimize the accumulation. of technical debt, particularly through or in support of layers of This has particular implications for execution processes focused on transition planning such as change management, release and deployment management, and service assurance and testing, which are Continuous delivery is an evolution of what has been known as the software development lifecycle and/or software development management. It assumes that there are a series of activities that can be streamlined and modified to create flow through code and automation where appropriate, as below. automation. addressed through DevOps'approach to continuous delivery.

Chapter 5: DevOps 32 Continuous Integration Automated building Automated testing Automated provisioning Automated deployment 888880088888 Figure 15: The stages of DevOps automation This is conceptualized as a toolchain or pipeline that reflects an overall automated process that integrates multiple existing processes and capabilities rather than a series of automated individual steps. In continuous delivery, each tool integrates with and flows into another. For example, if the code is committed to the source repository called the trunk, an automated set of management practices executes and gets it right to the point of shipping, possibly over the line into production, going from continuous delivery to continuous deployment. Release to customer Develop MANUAL Commit AUTO Build Test Provision Deploy CIs server o ww. o ww. o ww Build Test Result Source repository RESULT RESULT RESULT RESULT CHECK-IN Testing Staging Production LTT AUTO Figure 16: Continuous deployment

Chapter 5: DevOps 33 Understanding DevOps The challenge of achieving continuous delivery and deployment involves breaking down barriers and walls between the development and operation teams in the organization. Therefore, DevOps involves stages of evolution in organizational teaming and collaboration. Stage 1: Dev and Ops (increased collaboration) Stage 2: DevOps (dedicated team) Stage 3: DevOps (cross-functional teams) Figure 17: The evolution of the DevOps team structure The first stage of the evolution of the DevOps team structure is simply putting into place elements and solutions that allow for increased collaboration between Dev and Ops. Examples include the co-location of Dev and Ops teams in common workspaces or digitally enabling communication through shared collaboration and communication solutions. The; goal is to take the Dev and Ops functions that once were siloed and encourage them to work in cross-functional teams that are close-knit and highly collaborative Some organizations take a you build it, you run it'approach, making developers more responsible for operating their applications in production to help both teams fully understand the needs of each other, The second stage of DevOps team structures is the dedicated DevOps team, implemented in a way that discourages its existence as another silo. Frequently the team composition at this stage will include members from development, testing, and security but not include operations roles. The narrow team composition to upstream design, build, and test capabilities does not represent the DevOps intent of creating a full-stack team that includes roles from an operation's perspective. Often, this means implementing a DevOps team'with the idea of continuing to evolve it with the third stage in mind. The third stage of the evolution of team structure in DevOps is the re-organization of Dev and Ops into Cross-functional teams are built with representatives of all disciplines who have the responsibility for developing and deploying a service. They are designed to be empowered, self-managed, and self sufficient. These teams may be temporary, assembled only to work on short-term projects but they may also be permanent. Most importantly, these teams resemble the adaptive, self-organizing teams that will be needed to achieve an ideal end goal of true integration of the product and platform teams through and that work side by side towards the same goals. and further break down the silo mentality. cross-functional teams that include stakeholders from both Dev and Ops functions. automation, as illustrated below.

Chapter 5: DevOps 34 CUSTOMERS PRODUCT TEAM 1 PRODUCT TEAM 2 PRODUCT TEAM 3 PRODUCT TEAM 4 (API) Self-service layer Platform as a service (Paas) Control Deployment Monitoring Logging PLATFORM TEAMS Infrastructure as a service (laas) Backup and recovery Security Auto-update Figure 18: Product and platform teams At this stage, the concept of platform as a service'(PaaS) is standardized and implemented leveraging standard environments and artifacts. The adoption of standardized environments supports the goal of self-service for product teams. As previously described, cross-functional product teams have members from each specialization. However, most organizations will struggle with how to practically scale this approach with limited resources. The answer to this challenge is to adopt highly automated build, test, provisioning, and deployment solutions. However, this final goal presupposes a couple of critical success factors and environmental conditions which include: The majority of the technology environment is software-defined and supports continuous delivery automation, cloud-based elasticity, self-healing, and remediation. (Infrastructure, software-defined network, database configuration, environmental configuration). Change risks can be lowered by leveraging abstraction techniques such as containerization, and Testing coverage and confidence cover the majority of the environment to support continuous deployment based on automated go/no-go'decisions based on trusted test results. Shared platform tooling is leveraged by the product teams which is enabled by standard artifacts, serverless computing. scripts, and orchestration automation. The DevOps'Full Stack The concept of the DevOps''Full Stack'approach as described above is a play-on-words leveraging a popular technology and architecture concept that simply means the full story. While each of the layers of this stack is critical, there is an order of sequence and dependency that must be addressed for success.

Chapter 5: DevOps 35 Unless an organization understands that at its heart the DevOps movement represents a combination. of organizational, cultural, process, and technological change efforts that must work together, DevOps will not be successful. The very name of this movement, DevOps, is the blending or merging of two separate traditional IT functions into one team sharing common values, practices, and priorities. System-wide For DevOps to be successful various stakeholder groups need to share common beliefs, practices, and priorities and understand the importance and related dependencies between each of the layers. velocity is impossible if each IT group is trying to be Agile in different directions. People and culture layer Governance and leadership Culture and organizational change Structure and teaming models Processes and practices layer Lean and systems-thinking Integrated ITSM" execution processes Agile development and project management Automation layer Cloud and virtual environments Continuous delivery architectures Continuous deployment pipelines Without a full understanding of each of these critical layers DevOps capabilities and practices organizations are aware of just a piece of the overall puzzle and are missing key components of the DevOps'Full Stack.

Chapter 6: Key Enabler Roles Establishing key enabler roles is a strategic approach to establishing ownership and accountability for IT management capabilities and resources focused on building and nurturing positive relationships with stakeholders. It focuses on understanding their needs, building trust, delivering value, maintaining open communication, and continuously improving to achieve mutual benefits and long-term success. These key enabler roles facilitate effective relationship management, communication channels, and mechanisms enabling the flow of information between business stakeholders and IT service providers. This exchange of insights and feedback helps shape IT strategies, prioritize initiatives, and align Ultimately, the adoption of key roles to support relationship management activities enables organizations to deliver value tol both thel business organization and its customers. By fostering alignment between business and IT, these defined roles empower organizations to achieve their business goals resources accordingly. while ensuring customer satisfaction through the delivery of high-quality IT services. Enabling Integrated IT Service Management with Key Roles A fundamental principle in any management system is the necessity of establishing ownership and accountability. This is crucial for the continual improvement of resources, products, or services. Active governance and leadership are essential, with a dedicated role responsible for setting future targets. This role involves managing resources to bridge the gap between their current and desired future states. Without this focused approach, resources risk suffering from inadequate governance and management. In IT service management (ITSM), assigning key roles for ownership and management is vital. These roles contribute to continuous improvement, with a strong focus on customer needs. Responsibilities include understanding customer requirements, engaging with stakeholders effectively, managing service levels, ensuring customer satisfaction, and driving service improvements. Moreover, these roles are instrumental in resolving conflicts, aligning IT services with business objectives, and fostering long lasting, mutually beneficial relationships with customers and stakeholders.

Chapter 6: Key Enabler Roles 37 Examples of Key Enabler Roles The focus of establishing these key enabler roles is to cultivate intentional governance and management while establishing a culture of collaboration and integration among critical IT service provider roles. These roles focus on bridging the relational gap between business and IT functions in support of the overall principles of integratedITSM. The roles include business relationship managers, product and service owners, vendor relationship managers, and service delivery managers, among others. These roles work together to develop a comprehensive understanding of the business needs and requirements and ensure high-quality products and services align seamlessly with the overarching business strategy. Business relationship manager The role of the business relationship manager (BRM) is to establish, manage, and enhance positive relationships with customers through intentional and proactive engagement. The business relationship manager assumes various responsibilities: Serving as the liaison between the customers and the IT service provider, understanding and conveying customer needs to the service provider, and communicating the service provider's Managing the relationship with the customer based on two guiding principles: ensuring no IT service surprises for customers and no customer surprises for the service provider. Supporting the business customer by creating business case documentation, participating in strategic meetings to understand future direction and objectives, defining customer service requirements and success criteria, managing conflicts and complaints, and providing updates on Assisting with organizational change management activities, such as advising on change management, creating communication plans, monitoring communication effectiveness, coordinating with other departments, and ensuring customer readiness for releases. Identifying business cycles and activities, conducting audits/reviews of the BRM process, producing impact analysis and management status reports, confirming costs and funding, working on service level agreements, communicating scheduled outages, validating release schedules, acting as an escalation point for customers, and participating in service review Facilitating ongoing service review meetings with customers, conducting customer satisfaction assessments, evaluating survey results with key stakeholders, and responding withi improvement capabilities, news, events, and plans to the customer. service provider services and upcoming events of interest. meetings. plans. Product owner and IT service owner  the interrelated roles The roles of a product owner and an IT service owner are distinct yet interrelated within the realm of IT service management.

Chapter 6: Key Enabler Roles 38 A product owner is responsible for defining and managing a specific product or set of products. They work closely with stakeholders to understand customer needs, gather requirements, and prioritize features and functionalities. The product owner acts as the voice of the customer, ensuring that the product meets user expectations, aligns with business goals, and delivers value to the organization. They collaborate with developers, providing guidance and clarification, and continually iterate on the product An IT service owner takes on the responsibility of managing one or more IT services throughout their life cycle. They ensure that the services meet the agreed-upon service level requirements, align with business needs, and comply with applicable standards and regulations. They work closely with various stakeholders, including customers, business units, and IT teams, to ensure the delivery of reliable and efficient IT services. The IT service owner also manages service performance, monitors metrics, identifies areas for improvement, and drives initiatives to enhance service quality and customer satisfaction. At times, the product owner and IT service owner may be the same person. In some cases, the product(s) Both product and service owners leverage all the other enablers, frameworks, and models to fulfill the to enhance its quality and user experience. that support the service are provided by external groups. goals of their respective roles effectively: Lean principles to drive efficiency and deliver maximum value. They are dedicated to understanding customer needs and preferences, ensuring a customer-focused approach Agile development frameworks, such as Scrum, when working on innovation-type work, DevOps practices to ensure that the product's deployment, testing, and monitoring processes are Organizational change management to collaborate with stakeholders to understand and address throughout the product development process. collaborating closely with the development team and stakeholders. aligned with customer needs and business goals. the impact of the product and its associated changes on the organization. Product owners play a crucial role in the execution of integrated ITSM processes: Service level management: Product owners collaborate with service level managers to define and manage service level agreements (SLAS) that align with the customer's requirements and Service catalog management: Product owners work closely with service catalog managers to ensure that the product offerings are accurately represented in the service catalog. Problem management: The role of product owners in problem management is to collaborate with identify, analyze, and address recurring or significant issues related to the product. Incident management: Product owners play a critical role in incident management by collaborating with Incident management to prioritize and address incidents related to the expectations. product. Service owners play a crucial role in the execution of integrated ITSM processes: Incident management: Service owners'expertise and understanding of the service enable them to effectively contribute to incident resolution and they may chair the major incident team for high-priority incidents related to their services.

Chapter 6: Key Enabler Roles 39 Problem management: Service owners play a major role in problem management by actively Service assurance and testing: Service owners help to assess whether new releases affecting the service are production-ready, meet quality standards, and align with the service's requirements. Change management: Service owners participate in assessing and approving changes to the Configuration management: Service owners ensure that all groups responsible for maintaining data and relationships related to the service architecture maintain the required level of integrity. Service catalog management: Service owners play a crucial role in ensuring the accuracy of the participating in identifying the root cause of issues impacting the service. services they own. service catalog concerning their service. Vendor relationship manager The vendor relationship manager (VRM) plays a crucial role in integrated ITSM by overseeing vendor relationships and ensuring effective collaboration between the organization and its vendors. The VRM works closely with other key roles such as business relationship managers, product owners, IT service owners, and service delivery managers to achieve business and customer goals. To fulfill their role effectively, vendor relationship managers leverage: Lean to eliminate waste in vendor management processes and ensure efficient and value-driven Agile practices, including ensuring that vendors participate in Agile Scrum events effectively and DevOps to promote seamless collaboration and integration between vendors and internal ITSM processes and to ensure vendors are engaged in continuous delivery and improvement practices. Organizational change to facilitate smooth transitions and minimize disruptions when vendor engagements efficiently introducing new vendors or changing existing vendor relationships. Vendor relationship managers in the integrated ITSM processes Vendor relationship managers play a crucial role in the execution of integrated ITSM processes including: Incident management: VRMs work closely with vendors during high-priority incidents to coordinate efforts, address the incident promptly, and restore services to meet agreed-upon Problem management: VRMS contribute to problem management by actively participating in the identification of root causes and proposing permanent fixes for vendor-related issues. Service level management: VRMS are instrumental in defining service level agreements (SLAS) and monitoring vendor performance against targets to ensure the services provided meet the Release and deployment management: VRMS have a significant role in assessing the readiness of Service assurance and testing: VRMs collaborate with vendors during service assurance activities, including testing and validation to ensure that vendors adhere to agreed-upon testing processes, service levels. agreed-upon service levels new vendor releases impacting services. quality standards, and contractual obligations.

Chapter 6: Key Enabler Roles Service delivery manager 40 A service delivery manager (SDM) is responsible for ensuring that an organization's services are delivered to clients or customers in a timely, efficient, and effective manner. The role of an SDM will work closely with product and service owners, BRMS, and vendor management and may be either an Internal SDM: The SDM collaborates with vendor management to ensure effective vendor selection, External SDM: The SDM from a managed service provider (MSP) plays a crucial role in collaborating with BRMS and product and service owners to ensure smooth and effective service delivery. internal provider employee or a vendor-supplied role for outsourced services. contract management, and vendor performance evaluation. To fulfill their role effectively, service delivery managers leverage: Lean by adopting Lean principles to eliminate waste by identifying and streamlining processes to ensure the smooth flow of services, reduce unnecessary steps, and optimize resource Agile by working collaboratively with product owners and cross-functional development teams DevOps by tracking key performance indicators (KPIS) related to service delivery, such as deployment frequency, lead time, and mean time to restore, identifying areas for improvement, and initiating corrective actions to enhance the overall efficiency and reliability of service Organizational change management to actively support and participate in change initiatives, communicate changes effectively, engage appropriate stakeholders, and manage resistance to Service delivery managers play a crucial role in the execution of integrated ITSM processes including: Incident management: The SDM plays a crucial role in incident management by collaborating with incident response teams, coordinating resources, and providing support to resolve incidents Major incident management: The SDM often takes a more active role in leading the incident response efforts including coordinating stakeholders, ensuring effective communication between teams, providing regular updates to senior management and customers, and overseeing the Request management: The SDM contributes to request management by establishing and Monitoring and alerting: The SDM oversees the monitoring and alerting activities to ensure the Problem management: The SDM is involved in problem management, particularly in the utilization. to address customer issues or to deliver on agreed customer deliverables. delivery. change. promptly. resolution process. maintaining efficient processes for handling service requests. continuous availability and performance of services. participation of blameless postmortems.

Chapter 6: Key Enabler Roles 41 The Importance of the Key Enabler Roles The roles and responsibilities related to key enablers in integrated IT service management positively contribute to bridging the gap between business and IT functions and aligning IT services with business The business relationship manager (BRM) is pivotal in maintaining and enhancing customer relationships through proactive engagement. This role serves as a liaison between customers and the IT service provider, managing customer expectations, participating in strategic planning, and assisting in Product and service owners, while distinct, play interrelated roles in defining and managing products or IT services throughout their life cycle. They ensure alignment with customer needs and business goals, leveraging Lean, Agile, DevOps, and organizational change management principles to drive efficiency The vendor relationship manager (VRM) oversees the relationships with vendors, ensuring effective collaboration and integration of vendors with internal ITSM processes. VRMS are crucial in incident and problem management, service level management, and release and deployment management, working to Service delivery managers (SDMs), whether internal or external, are responsible for the efficient and effective delivery of services. They play a critical role in incident management, major incident management, request management, monitoring and alerting, and problem management, adopting Lean, In conclusion, these key enabler roles are essential in the execution of integrated ITSM processes. By leveraging various frameworks and methodologies, they ensure that IT services are aligned with business objectives, driving continuous improvement and fostering strong, mutually beneficial relationships with customers, stakeholders, and vendors. Their collaborative efforts contribute significantly to the overall effectiveness and efficiency of IT service management within an organization. objectives. organizational change management. and customer satisfaction. ensure that vendor services meet the agreed-upon standards. Agile, and DevOps methodologies to optimize service delivery.


Executing Integrated IT Service Management 

IX integratedITSM Book Series This book is a part of a series on integratedITSM, with a specific focus on the execution layer of IT service management processes within the model. For first-time readers of this series, the initial statement might: not: immediately resonate. The following excerpts from the first edition of integratedITSM book break down these concepts. integratedITSM integratedITSM is a management system approach that describes how IT needs to work within business goals to achieve business results. It accomplishes this through applying an integrated and holistic approach to leadership, structure, enabling frameworks, execution processes, and balanced performance management reporting that supports overall business goals at strategic, tactical, and operational levels. High-level key components of IT business management include: IT leadership: Provides direction and guidance for IT business integration to deliver value to the IT organization: Provides the structure and design of IT and the required functional capabilities Enablers: Represent methods and practices that help IT adopt a customer-centric and value Execution processes: Enable IT to deliver valuable products and services that meet or exceed customer expectations. This: is the scope and focus of this document as it comprises one of a series Performance improvement and management: Performance and improvement management facilitates the evaluation and assessment of IT'sp performance and value in terms ofits contribution business that support the delivery of services aligned to business processes and value driven approach to service delivery of books related to the integratedITSM approach to the business vision and goals BUSINESS LEADERSHIP BUSINESS ITLEADERSHIP ITORGANIZATION EXECUTION management Knowledge management Request Servicec catalog Service assurance and management BUSINESS RESULTS ENABLERS Organizational change management Key enabler roles Leana andv mapping value stream Agile ands Scrum DevOps PERFORMANCE AND IMPROVEMENT Metrics andreporting Assessments Improvement planning Business management relationship Servicel management level management Incident Problem management Monitoring anda alerting Tperformance results Changen management Vendor management Release management anddeployment ITa assetr management Configuration management testing Figure 1: integratedITSM Model

integratedITSM Book Series The three levels of integration X integratedITSM involves the application of three levels of integration. While this concept can be thought of as a maturity model or a deployment approach, it is important to note that all three levels of integration need to occur simultaneously and congruently for an organization to achieve its business goals and objectives efficiently and in a cost-effective manner. Level 1 Integration of IT service management (ITSM) processes Level 2 Integration of enablers with ITSM Level 3 Integration of ITSM with business requirements Level 3 ITI business management Level 2 Integrated enablers, frameworks, and practices Integration comprises three levels: integratedITSM is a management system approach that involves the application of all three levels ofi integration. All three levels of integration need to occur simultaneously and congruently for an organization to achieve its business goals and objectives efficiently and cost-effectively. Level 1 Integrated ITSM processes Figure 2: The three levels of integration integratedITSM = all three levels Level 1: Integration of ITSM processes The core ori innermost level of integration involvesi integrating ITSM processes among themselves. At this level, incident management, problem management, change management, release and deployment management, and other ITSM processes must work together seamlessly using shared tools to deliver IT services efficiently and effectively. The integration of these processes ensures that IT services are delivered consistently and in a timely manner. For example, the incident management process must integrate with the problem management process to ensure that recurring incidents are resolved This book will focus on this level of integration and the various processes that are listed in this document will each include examples of key integrations. These integrations are both representative and examples permanently. of the key points of process interaction but are not an exhaustive list.

integratedITSM Book Series Level 2: Integration of enablers with ITSM XI The next level of integration involves integrating ITSM processes with enabling frameworks, methods, and practices such as organizational change management, Lean, Agile Scrum, and DevOps. These practices help to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of ITSM processes and enable the IT organization to quickly respond to changing business needs. For example, integrating the change management process with Agile practices can help the IT organization to deliver changes faster within complex adaptive business systems and environments. Level 3: Integration of ITSM with business requirements The highest level of integration involves incorporating the IT service organization with the rest of the business functions. Integrated business management promotes a customer-centric and business-focused approach to service management, ensuring that business objectives and requirements drive IT management practices and processes from strategy through to operations. At this level of integration, the business's governance, vision, values, mission, and strategy drive the IT service provider's approach to IT service management and third-party service provider integration. This level of integration ensures that IT services are delivered in a way that supports the business goals and objectives. For example, if the business goal is to improve customer satisfaction or to execute its overall digital strategy, the IT organization must align its services to support this goal. However, the adoption of an integrated approach for the first two levels is a critical success factor for the effective and efficient realization of the goals of integrated business management. Other books in the series: integratedITSM Enabling Integrated IT Service Management Sestee Leading integratedITSM OEee Improving integratedITSM Eretantene Oteisee

XII Foreword "ITSM is more than just a service desk." I was first introduced to ITSM by my mentor, Malcolm Fry. Malcolm is no longer with us, but his mark In 1974, Ibegan working in IT operations, and over the ensuing 12 years, Ineverl heard anyone talk about processes, let alone ITSM processes." Then I joined a small consulting firm and started following Malcolm around. His greater IT experience and his ability to think deeply and connect the dots on ITSM is indelible. introduced me to: The Help Desk Problem and Change Management Service Level Agreements Quality Control and Assurance The above are the four titles of his seminal work, The IT Service Culture. The rest is history, SO they say. I have often declared that "If: it wasn't for Malcolm, we'd all be doing something different now." That might be a bit of an exaggeration, but I know I would certainly be doing something different. And yet, nearly 40 years later, here we are where the world of ITSM is full of SO many flavors and spin My answer to that question is simple: It had to be done. We needed to strip away the prevailing overemphasis on strategy, and clearly explain how the primarily operational processes of IT service management can be seti up to work effectively and in harmony with each other. You should find this book Thank you to all the Pink supporters (customers and friendly associates in our industry) and the great team at Pink who have worked SO diligently on this project. You have all played a significant part  A special thank you to the amazingly talented Troy DuMoulin, who is a thinking and writing machine. offs that it boggles the mind. So, why another book on ITSM? refreshing, clear, and  above all  relevant and indispensable. whether great or small  in making this happen. Malcolm would be SO proud of you, Troy. As am I David Ratcliffe President, Pink Elephant Toronto, Canada January 2024

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM Business process management (BPM) and IT service management (ITSM) are two related concepts that both relate to business improvement and IT service quality. BPM, or business process management, is the practice of analyzing, optimizing, and monitoring business processes across the organization. ITSM, or IT service management, is the practice of designing, delivering, operating, and improving IT services that support business goals. BPM and ITSM are different in scope and focus, but they also complement each other. BPM can help by supporting the design of IT management processes that align IT services with business needs and processes. ITSM can help BPM ensure IT service management processes are Systems theory and systems thinking represent a management approach that sees an organization as a complex system with interrelated parts. In systems theory, every complex system has five core optimized to support the reliability and efficiency of business goals and objectives. components: 1. Inputs 2. Processes 3. Outputs 4. Feedback 5. Environment Inputs are the resources used to achieve goals. Processes are the activities that transform inputs into outputs. Outputs are the results or outcomes of the processes. Feedback comprises the information that showsh how well the outputs: meet the goals and expectations. The environment encompasses the external factors that affect the organization. Applying a systems approach to IT management processes can help IT departments optimize their performance and align their goals with the larger organization by considering how their inputs, outputs, processes, feedback, and environment interact. Likewise, business process management (BPM) is a systematic approach to designing, executing, monitoring, and improving business processes. Business processes are the activities and tasks that an organization performs to achieve its goals. There are three types of business processes human-centric, document-centric, and integration-centric. Human-centric processes involve human interactions and decisions such as customer service or sales. Document-centric processes deal with the creation, manipulation, and storage of documents such as invoices or contracts. Integration-centric processes connect different systems and applications such as order fulfillment or inventory management.

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM 14 IT plays a vital role in BPM, because it enables the automation, integration, and optimization of business processes. IT can provide tools and platforms for modeling, executing, monitoring, and improving business processes, as well as facilitating communication and collaboration among process participants. IT can also support the analysis and evaluation of business process performance and outcomes, as well Human-centric BPM focuses on processes that involve a high degree ofhuman interaction and decision making such as customer service, sales, or project management. Human-centric BPM aims to optimize the performance and satisfaction of the people involved in the processes by providing them with tools, guidelines, and feedback. Examples of human-centric BPM include workflow management systems, case Document-centric BPM focuses on processes that involve a high degree of document creation, manipulation, and exchange  such as contract management, invoice processing, or compliance reporting. Document-centric BPM aims to optimize the quality and consistency of the documents involved in the processes by providing them with templates, rules, and validations. Examples of document-centric BPM include document management systems, content management systems, and Integration-centric BPM focuses on processes that involve a high degree of integration and coordination among different applications, systems, and data sources such as order fulfillment, inventory management, or supply chain management. Integration-centric BPM aims to optimize the speed and reliability of the data flows involved in the processes by providing them with adapters, connectors, and orchestrators. Examples of integration-centric BPM include enterprise application integration (EAI), as the identification and implementation of process improvements. management systems, and collaborative platforms. electronic signature systems. service-oriented architecture (SOA), and business process automation (BPA)." 1 Based on materials from Martins, Julia. The Beginner'> Guide to Business Process Management (BPM)." Asana.com. Last modified December 12, 2022. Accessed July 18, 2023. hitps/asana.com/resources/business: pnwe-nansgmenttpas

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM 15 The Core Components of a Business Process A business process: is a set of activities that aims to achieve a specific goal or outcome for an organization. Process execution begins when a condition, called at triggering event occurs (for example, something fails, or someone requests a change), and ends when a terminating event occurs. Processes are supported by one or more inputs (e.g, information about the device or resource that failed), often inputs that come from other processes and produce one or more outputs (e.g a completed record), and often outputs that An example of a business process in IT is software development  which involves planning, designing, A good business process needs to be repeatable, transparent, and agile. Repeatable means that the process can be performed consistently and reliably by different people or teams. Transparent means that the process can ber monitored and evaluated by stakeholders and customers. Agile means that the process support other processes. coding, testing, deploying, and maintaining software applications. can adapt to changing requirements and feedback quickly and efficiently.2 Each business process has the following key components: 1. The process name: Provide a name for the process; process names usually start with a verb, for 2. A business purpose and customers who will benefit from the outcome of the process; this can be 3. Objectives: Defined objectives will support the creation of process measures to validate the example,'Apply for leave'aj person or group external or internal to the provider, or another process process's purpose. 4. The scope: Applies to the boundaries of the process 5. Triggering events: These are conditions that must be met at the beginning of the process. 6. Inputs: What resources are used or consumed by the process? Inputs are the resources needed to 7. Activities and actors: These describe the steps in the process along with the actors responsible 8. Terminating events: These are the conditions that must be met at the end of the process. What is execute the process. for executing each step. the state of the system when the process ends? 9. Outputs: These are items created as a result of the process. Examples include paper forms and software applications. 10. Enablers: What tools are used during the process? Which platforms support the process? 11. Metrics: What aspects of the process are measured? For example, the amount of time it takes to complete a cycle.3 21 Based on materials from Villanova University. "What Is a Business Process? Definition, Importance and Examples." I Villanovau.com. Last modified September 9, 2022. Accessed July 18, 2023. Bipyhonsilinsaicoimspebsmaturisasitnipoazasey 3] Based on materials from Famuyide, Stephanie. "10 Process Components You Should Define.' Buiwenalpskueninp.om. Last modified May 11, 2014. Accessed July 18, 2023. hitps:/wwwc.businesgnalyasikomings.om/blop201351/10p7ses-components-xous-vou-should-define

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM Business Process Scope 16 The scope of a business process is an important factor to consider when designing and implementing the process. It defines thel boundaries and limitations of the process, as well as the stakeholders and resources involved. The scope can be applied to the following areas in different ways: The needs and objectives of the organization: The scope should align with the strategic goals and vision of the organization, as well as the specific requirements and expectations of the customers and users. The scope should also consider the risks and benefits of the process, and how it will The complexity and maturity of the IT environment (development, test, production): The scope should match the capabilities and constraints of the IT infrastructure, systems, and applications that support the process. The scope should also take into account the development, testing, and deployment cycles of the IT environment, and how they will impact the process delivery and The geographical distribution of the business process: The scope should reflect the geographical locations and time zones of the process participants, customers, and users. The scope should also consider the cultural, legal, and regulatory differences that may affect the process execution and The type and level of services provided: The scope should specify the type and level of services that the process will provide to its customers and users such as products, information, or support. The scope should also define the service level agreements (SLAS) that will govern the process The process complexity: The scope should capture the complexity of the process in terms of its inputs, outputs, activities, tasks, roles, responsibilities, dependencies, exceptions, variations, and controls. The scope should also identify the key performance indicators (KPIS) that will measure affect the performance and quality of the organization. maintenance. compliance. quality, availability, reliability, and security. process efficiency, effectiveness, and customer satisfaction. By using these five categories, an organization can define and document the scope of its business processes in a clear and consistent manner. This can help to ensure that the process meets the expectations and requirements of the stakeholders, aligns with the organizational strategy and objectives, and delivers value to the business.

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM 17 Business Process Roles All processes include generic roles that need to be defined to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of the process execution. These generic roles include the following: process workers; the process owner; and the process coordinator: Process workers are the individuals who perform the tasks and activities that constitute the process. They are responsible for following the established procedures and standards, as well as reporting any issues or deviations that may arise during the process. Process workers need to The process owner: is the person who has the overall accountability and authority for the process. He or she defines the process objectives, scope, and performance indicators, as well as monitors and evaluates the process outcomes. The process owner also initiates and approves any changes or improvements to the process and ensures the process is aligned with the organizational The process coordinator is the person who facilitates and coordinates the communication and collaboration among the process workers and other stakeholders. They also provide guidance and support to the process workers, as well as resolve any conflicts orissues that may arise during the process. The process coordinator also collects and analyzes the process data and reports the Adopting an authority matrix is important for aligning the roles with process activities because it clarifies the roles and responsibilities of each person involved in the process. An authority matrix defines who has the decision-making power, who needs to be consulted, and who needs to be informed or notified for each activity: in the process. This way, an authority matrix reduces ambiguity and confusion, enhances accountability and transparency, and improves coordination and communication among the process have the necessary skills, knowledge, and resources to carry out their duties. strategy and goals. results and feedback to the process owner. participants. Process worker: Performs one or more process activities Process owner: Accountable for the end-to-end process Process coordinator: Responsible for day-to-day process coordination Figure 3: Business process roles and responsibilities

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM Algorithmic and Heuristic Processes 18 Behavioral scientists often classify work or learning experiences into two categories: algorithmic and When evaluating and enhancing IT capabilities and processes, understanding the differences between algorithmic, process-based work, and heuristic capabilities is key. This knowledge informs the Algorithmic tasks: Algorithmic tasks involve following established instructions that lead to a singular conclusion. There is a linear process to respond to a known opportunity or problem. For instance, a grocery checkout clerk's role primarily comprises algorithmic tasks. (They start an order, scan all items, obtain a total, request payment, optionally bag the groceries, and say have a nice day done!) Heuristic tasks: Heuristic tasks lack a definitive algorithm and demand experimentation to devise novel solutions. Creating an ad campaign typifies a heuristic task that requires inventive thinking. (Each ad campaign is different in approach, medium, and tactics that are guided by high-level policies.) heuristic. visualization, measurement, and improvement strategies for distinct types of work. Non-IT examples: Algorithmic example: Mass production, which is converting inputs to outputs, is explicit in manufacturing but less evident in service companies. Harley-Davidson transforms steel, rubber, and paint into motorcycles. Heuristic example: Al hospital converts the knowledge and skills of its medical personnel, along with equipment and supplies from a variety of sources, into health care services for patients. Algorithmic and heuristic principles in IT service management Many processes in IT service management lean toward being heuristic or algorithmic. Business relationship management, service level management, and configuration management embody heuristic processes. Conversely, incident management, problem management, and change management represent algorithmic processes. Incident management (algorithmic): Process: Normal incident management Input: Service outage reported Output: Confirmed service restoration Business relationship management (heuristic): Process: New business/customer requirement Input: Functional and nonfunctional requirements Output: Deployed product enhancement

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM Visualizing algorithmic and heuristic processes 19 Visualization techniques also differ based on the distinct nature of algorithmic and heuristic work. Algorithmic processes visualization: Flowcharts and swim lane diagrams suit processes like incident or Heuristic processes visualization: Techniques like mind maps, storyboards, and network diagrams highlight the integrated nature of nonlinear processes, allowing for flexibility in representation. These visualizations present the complex nature of key process activities but are not restricted to a linear flow. In summary, flowcharts and swim lanes are necessary for algorithmic processes to ensure repeatability change management. However, these are not effective for heuristic processes. and consistency. However, they have no value to heuristic processes. Continuous improvement (algorithmic and heuristic processes) Measuring and improving algorithmic and heuristic processes necessitate different approaches. Measuring algorithmic processes: For algorithmic workflows, where standard flow and lead times are expected; techniques like statistical process control charts effectively measure repeatability and control, The control chart is a graph used to identify process variation and study how a process changes over time. Process data is plotted based on a period of time to establish whether it is operating in a controlled or uncontrolled manner. A control chart has a central line for the target state condition, an upper line for the upper control limit or allowable or normal variance, and a lower line for the lower control limit. These lines are determined based on a defined degree of variation or tolerance that is acceptable in the process. For example, an SLA target for incident management could be, to restore priority 1 incidents within two By comparing current data to these lines, one can draw conclusions about whether the process variation is within a defined variation or tolerance limit (in control) or is unpredictable with data points Measuring heuristic processes: For heuristic processes like business relationship management, assessing effectiveness and efficiency involves using heuristics or guidelines rather than rigid rules. Heuristic evaluation, based on multiple guidelines, assesses effectiveness rather than process consistency. For this type of work, we use a general list of heuristics to assess process effectiveness and maturity. Heuristics: This simply means guidelines or expectations which come from both the service provider such as in incident management hours (target) 80% of the time (upper control limit +20). consistently falling outside of the defined variation limits (out of control). and customers rather than rigid rules of expectation.

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM 20 For example: To assess customer or service experience, expectations can be established across several heuristic categories such as: Brand image Service design Service delivery Customer service Service quality Customer journey Goal achievement Security and privacy Brand image example: Consider a luxury hotel chain known for its elegance and opulence. Its brand image evokes sophistication, luxury, and exceptional service. When guests enter the hotel, they expect high-end amenities, personalized attention, and a sense of exclusivity that is aligned with the brand's image. A streaming service provider designs its platform to be user-friendly, with intuitive navigation and personalized content recommendations. The design focuses on the ease of use that ensures customers Service design example: can effortlessly browse, select, and enjoy their preferred content. Service delivery example: A same-day delivery service promises prompt and efficient delivery of packages. Customers expect their parcels to arrive within the specified time frame and that they're intact and handled with care. The actual delivery experience, including the speed and condition of the package upon arrival, influences their perception of service delivery. Customer service example: A telecommunications company offers 24/7 customer support for troubleshooting; technical issues. Customers expect knowledgeable and courteous assistance when they encounter problems with their services. The efficiency and effectiveness of resolving their concerns contribute significantly to their overall satisfaction. Service quality example: An upscale restaurant prides itself on high-quality cuisine, top-notch ingredients, and impeccable presentation. Diners expect not only delicious food but also a sophisticated ambiance and attentive service. Consistency in food taste, ambiance, and service quality impacts customers'perception of the establishment. Customer journey example: An e-commerce platform ensures a seamless customer journey from browsing products to checkout and delivery. The journey includes easy navigation, relevant product suggestions, a hassle-free purchasing process, and timely updates on the order status. A smooth, intuitive journey enhances the overall experience.

Chapter 1: Business Process Management and ITSM 21 Goal achievement example: A fitness app helps users set fitness goals, track progress, and achieve milestones. It provides personalized workout plans, progress metrics, and motivational support. Users expect the app to assist them in reaching their fitness targets effectively, which influences their satisfaction and continued usage. A banking institution prioritizes data security and customer privacy in its online banking services. Customers expect robust encryption, multi-factor authentication, and clear privacy policies to safeguard their financial information. Confidence in the security measures significantly influences their trust and Each element plays an integral and crucial role in shaping the customer experience, which impacts Security and privacy example: loyalty to the bank. perceptions, satisfaction, and loyalty toward a product, service, or brand. Benefits of Business Process Management Business processes are important because they define how an organization operates and delivers value toits customers and stakeholders. Business processes enable an organization to achieve its goals, improve its performance, and adapt to changing environments. By designing, documenting, and optimizing business processes, an organization can increase its efficiency, quality, and customer satisfaction by: Enhancing efficiency by streamlining workflows, eliminating waste, and optimizing resources. For example, a business process for inventory management can reduce the risk of overstocking Improving quality by ensuring that standards are met, errors are minimized, and customer satisfaction is increased. For example, a business process for quality control can detect and correct Reducing costs by lowering operational expenses, increasing productivity, and avoiding rework. For example, a business process for project management can help plan, execute, and monitor Creating opportunities for improvement by enabling continuous learning, innovation, and adaptation. For example, a business process for performance evaluation can provide feedback, recognition, and incentives for employees to improve their skills and performance Supporting long-term goals by aligning activities with the vision, mission, and values of the organization. For example, a business process for strategic planning can help define the direction, or understocking and save storage and transportation costs defects before they reach the customers and prevent complaints and returns projects within budget and schedule constraints priorities, and actions of the organization for the future

Chapter 2: integratedITSM Execution Processes An IT service organization depends on its key execution and operations processes to achieve customer The IT service organization's execution processes consist of strategic, tactical, and operational processes that must collaborate to support customer goals and objectives. Strategic processes focus on aligning IT services with long-term business objectives, prioritizing investments, and ensuring the overall direction is in line with customer needs. Tactical processes bridge the gap between strategy and operations by translating strategic goals into actionable plans, resource allocation, and project management. Operational processes are responsible for day-to-day execution, incident management, problem resolution, and service delivery, which ensure customer expectations are met promptly and effectively. The successful integration and coordination of these processes enable IT service organizations to deliver The effective execution of key processes within an IT service organization facilitates prompt incident resolution, reliable service delivery, and customer satisfaction. Operational processes align IT services with strategic goals, mitigate risks, and support business continuity. By emphasizing continuous improvement, organizations can enhance service quality, optimize resource allocation, and consistently Examples of key strategic, tactical, and operational processes necessary for effective IT service and strategic goals that support business results. value, enhance customer satisfaction, and achieve desired business outcomes. deliver value to customers, thereby supporting business results. management include but are not limited to: Business relationship management: Business relationship management involves maintaining positive relationships with business stakeholders to understand their needs and align IT services Service level management: Service level management is responsible for establishing, monitoring, and ensuring that IT services meet agreed-upon service level agreements (SLAs) and performance Incident management: Incident management focuses on resolving and restoring IT services to normal operation after disruptions or incidents such as system failures or service outages Problem management: Problem management aims to identify and address the root causes of with business objectives standards recurring incidents and prevent them from happening again in the future

Chapter 2: integratedITSM Execution Processes 23 Knowledge management: Knowledge management involves capturing, organizing, and sharing IT-related knowledge and information to enhance problem-solving; and decision-making within Request management: Request management handles user requests for IT services such as software installations or access permissions to ensure the efficient and consistent handling of Service catalog management: Service catalog management establishes and maintains a catalog of available IT services to support overall relationship management and make it easier for users to Change management: Change management supports the assessment, scheduling, and authorization of changes to IT systems, processes, and infrastructure to minimize risks and Release and deployment management: Release and deployment management coordinates the planning, testing, and deployment of IT releases or updates into the production environment Service assurance and testing: Service assurance and testing involve verifying that IT services and components meet quality and performance standards to ensure they deliver the intended Monitoring and alerting: Monitoring and alerting tools and processes are used to continuously observe the performance of IT services, systems, networks, and applications and send alerts when Vendor management: Vendor management is responsible for managing relationships with external IT service providers and vendors that include contract negotiation, performance IT asset management: IT asset management involves tracking and managing an organization's IT assets including hardware, software, and licenses to optimize asset utilization and reduce costs Configuration management: Configuration management focuses on maintaining accurate records of an organization's IT infrastructure components, their relationships, and configurations These IT management processes and more (that are: not listed in these examples) play an essential role in supporting the execution, effectiveness, and efficiency of IT services within an IT service provider organization. The remainder of this document will provide an overview of each of these example IT the organization service requests request and understand the services provided by IT disruptions and ensure service availability value issues arise monitoring, and compliance management to support effective IT operations and changes business management execution processes.

Chapter 8: Business Relationship Management (BRM) Business Relationship Management: Purpose and Objectives Purpose: To align IT services and capabilities with the strategic goals and needs of the business Business relationship management (BRM) is a crucial process that enables IT to align its services and capabilities with the strategic goals and needs of the business. By engaging actively and continuously with the customer/business, BRM helps to understand, measure, and leverage the value of IT services. BRM also facilitates communication, collaboration, and coordination between IT and the business to ensure both parties are satisfied with the outcomes and benefits of IT services. A mature BRM practice can bring many benefits to both IT and the business, such as: Improved customer satisfaction and loyalty Increased business value and innovation Enhanced trust and transparency Reduced costs and risks Optimized resource utilization and performance Key objectives of the BRM process include: Active, ongoing engagement with the customer/business Assisting the business in understanding, measuring, and leveraging the value of IT services Identifying the business customer's value goals and ensuring both IT and the business understand the requirements needed to meet the strategic and tactical objectives and support Identifying business customer needs and requirements and ensuring the service provider can meet these needs as the business needs change or evolve over time and during emerging Assisting the business in understanding, measuring, and leveraging the value of IT services Assisting in the integration and supporting the alignment of the service provider strategy and the Developing a lasting relationship between the service provider and the business customer Understanding the trends or changes impacting the business's and service provider's Understanding how technology trends will impact the business's competitive advantage their successful execution circumstances Understanding the business customer's perspective of the service business strategy environments

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. Management (BRM) 25 Communicating and measuring the value delivered by the service provider Providing an integration point for business partner communications that include major incidents Clarifying initiatives and supporting business case development through portfolio management Facilitates a better understanding for customers about what to expect from IT products and Improves the service provider's level of understanding about the business's customers, tactics, Clears roadblocks and obstacles that interfere with the service provider and the business having Establishes consistent meetings with the IT service provider to discuss service level achievements that provide customers with the opportunity to have more confidence that the IT service provider Enables the IT service provider to engage with the business partner at the strategic level with the business, which enables them to suggest innovative solutions to the business objectives based on Structures ongoing communication with the customers of the IT service provider Benefits of BRM: services and strategies as substantive and beneficial relationship can meet the business needs current and emerging technologies Demand management Demand is a term that is used frequently in the context of IT service management. But many people are confused about its exact meaning. In summary, demand is basically any request or expectation that someone has from the IT service provider. For example, a request to use a new software application, or a business customer that contacts the IT service provider with the need to fix a problem with their computer, or a stated desire to improve the performance and speed of an IT system. These are all examples of demand. Demand: value outcomes"4 "Any source of claim on the IT service provider's time and/or resources for the delivery of customer Demand is important because it tells the IT service provider what kind of value the customers and users One of the processes that deal with demand is the business relationship management process. This process is responsible for establishing and maintaining good relationships between the IT service provider and the customers and users. The business relationship management process helps to understand the needs and preferences of the customers and to communicate them to the IT service provider. The business relationship management process also helps to manage the expectations and satisfaction of the customers and to ensure they receive the value they are looking for from the IT service are looking for and how they can deliver it effectively and efficiently. provider. 4 "IT Demand Management: What Is It and Why Do You Need It." Edison365.com. htpx/Aedeon3S.comitc demand-managementsmont-whutic-itawl-shy-de-xouned-iu

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. Management (BRM) Demand management is comprised of three primary activities: 26 Demand capture provides clear and compelling channels for customers to submit a new or modified demand. Specific processes such as BRM, request management, SLM, and service desk provide direct customer channels to support demand capture. The BRM process especially focuses on strategic and tactical demand rather than day-to-day operational demand. Demand forecasting: This uses historical demand capture and consumption trends to forecast or extrapolate future demand. Processes such as service catalog, request management, and portfolio management support strategic planning and resource. management through demand forecasting. Demand influencing/shaping: The principle of demand influencing is to optimize the use of an organization's resources through the means of processes such as BRM, service catalog, portfolio, and resource management capabilities. This takes place by providing service offerings that meet specific customer value needs or by influencing through the application of financial or role-based Note: It is important to observe that some organizations may choose to limit the engagement of the BRM roles to portfolio and project intake and management. However, the intended scope of the BRM capability is to support relationship management objectives around both strategic planning activities as boundaries. well as overall service provisioning and improvement.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 27 Business Relationship Management: Policies officially by a group of people or a business organization" "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed upon It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement Demand capture: Business relationship managers demand capture for portfolio and/or changed services. They will work with their business partners to develop business cases and funding models for the new service The reason for the policy Defines a standardized demand capture channel for and requests Benefits Standardized demand channels enable capture better visibility into and tactical strategic requests for new services. Standardized criteria and methods for assessing and ranking demand requests, as well as the mechanisms for communicating and reporting on the demand status and outcomes Demand requests are prioritized based on their alignment with the business strategy, value proposition, feasibility, and will act as a formal channel for strategic business demands management requests for new Provides the information. necessary to make informed funding decisions on new service requests for the business customer organization This policy defines how the IT organization will identify, prioritize, and manage the demand for IT services from the business customers. It should specify the roles and responsibilities of the IT business relationship managers, the business customers, and other stakeholders involved in the demand management process. It should also establish that the IT business relationship managers will provide regular feedback and updates to the business customers on the progress and results of their demand requests. request. risk. 5] Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy." Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. I Management (BRM) 28 Policy statement Partnership: The reason for the policy This policy defines how the IT organization will establish and maintain collaborative and trust-based relationships with the business customers and other stakeholders. It should specify the principles and values that will guide the interactions and behaviors of the IT staff and the business customers. Benefits IT staff will strive to understand the business needs and challenges, deliver value-added solutions, and ensure customer satisfaction. Business customers will provide clear requirements and expectations, participate actively in the service design and delivery process, and acknowledge and appreciate the IT contributions. 1 Provides another opportunity for the customers to rate the performance of the IT organization Provides input into continuous improvement Identifies and builds awareness for areas of improvement Enables the IT organization to recognize and reward outstanding customer service performance by the IT staff An increased awareness of the level of service being delivered to business customers The identification of improvement opportunities Provides input into the external service review meeting with vendors and external partners The IT organization will adopt aj partnership approach with the business customers and other stakeholders based on mutual respect, trust, and shared goals. The IT staff and the business customers will communicate openly and honestly, share information and knowledge, seek feedback and input, and resolve issues constructively. Focus on customer satisfaction: The IT organization will monitor and improve customer satisfaction on an ongoing basis. The IT business relationship managers will conduct regular customer satisfaction surveys to assess regard to the quality, timeliness, reliability, and value of the IT services. It is important to understand the customer's perception of the IT organization so the IT organization can identify improvement opportunities. The survey results will be analyzed and reported to identify strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. The the survey findings, best practices, and customer feedback. the perception and satisfaction IT organization will implement of the business customers with improvement plans based on Business relationship managers To ensure that business service level review meetings. aware of service level will participate in customer relationship managers are achievements and to identify improvement opportunities before they have an external meeting with their customer

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. I Management (BRM) 29 Policy statement Requirements The reason for the policy Working with roles such as product and service owners and business analysts, the BRM role ensures that strategic service requirements and success criteria are documented as: input into new service design and service level considerations. Benefits Improved knowledge of strategic requirements Improved service design input into the product and service planning, design, and development capabilities Key inputs into service level management and its reporting requirements Agreed-upon levels of service and the quality of service Improved expectation management and, overall, improved relationships Improved relationships with the business Improved vendor relationships and service levels Improved terms and service levels in vendor contracts Business relationship managers will meet with the business customer contacts to identify and document the strategic requirements and success criteria for new services. Service levels Understanding the service level requirement is critical to ensuring that relationships are managed and improved. Business relationship managers will work with service level management and service owners to ensure service level requirements are defined. Vendor alignment will work with vendor management and service owners to facilitate external service review meetings to provide thel business customer's perspective on service level achievements. Toj provide the business's S input and satisfaction about service provide opportunities to improve third-party vendor agreements Business relationship managers level achievements as well as Major incident management Tol keep the customer informed Improved relationships with the business Creates customer awareness and up to date on activities that are creating a service impact or could potentially create a service impact Business relationship managers will provide proactive communications to the business to keep them informed on major incidents and planned and unplanned changes.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. I Management (BRM) 30 Business Relationship Management: Terms and Definitions Agreement: A documented set of expectations between the service provider and customer that outlines agreed-upon responsibilities and the performance of both parties in a service exchange Business partner: This is an alternative name for an internal business customer organization. The term, partner, is sometimes preferred when the use of the term, customer, is reserved for external customers. Demand: Any claim on the IT service provider's time and/or resources for the delivery of customer value Account manager: This is a role that is very similar to that of the business relationship manager but includes more commercial aspects. It's most used in the context of service providers that offer IT services Business: This is an overall corporate entity or organization formed of several business units. In the context of ITSM, the term includes the public sector and not-for-profit organizations, as well as private companies. An IT service provider provides IT services to a business customer entity within a business context. The IT service provider may be part of the same business  as its customer (internal service Business case: This is the justification for a significant expenditure. The business case includes Customer(s): The customer is the person or group that receives the IT services or products delivered by End user: An end user is a person or other entity that consumes or makes use of the goods or services produced by the service provider. In this way, an end user may differ from a customer  since the entity IT strategy: An IT strategy can be defined as the decisions made to align the direction of the IT organization, technologies, capabilities, and talent  as well as the use of external parties 1 to support the business strategy to achieve long-term goals. The IT strategy provides a structure for long-term IT goals and the planning that will be necessary for striving for these goals. The strategy serves as a Rosetta Stone outcomes to external customers. provider)  or part of another business (external service provider). information. about the costs, benefits, options, issues, risks, and possible problems. the IT organization. or person that buys a product or service may not be the one that actually uses it. for architectural, system, and operational planning.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 31 Business Relationship Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events: BRM can be triggered by various events, such as: Business/customer need: This is when the customer has a new or changing requirement that needs to be addressed by the service provider. For example, the customer may want to launch a new product, expand to a new market, or improve their efficiency. The service provider should engage with the customer to understand their needs and propose solutions that meet them Voice of customer: This is when the customer provides feedback, complaints, compliments, or suggestions to the service provider. For example, the customer may express their satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the current service level, quality, or cost. The service provider should listen to the customer's voice and take actions to improve their satisfaction and loyalty Scheduled review: This is when the service provider and the customer meet regularly to review the performance, value, and outcomes of the service. For example, they may use metrics, reports, surveys, or audits to evaluate how well the service is meeting the customer's needs and expectations. The service provider should use this opportunity to identify gaps, risks, Feedback: This is when the service provider solicits input from the customer on specific aspects of the service. For example, they may ask for feedback on a new feature, a change request, a project proposal, or a satisfaction survey. The service provider should use this feedback to validate their assumptions, learn from their mistakes, and enhance their service quality and value These are some examples of how BRM can be triggered by different events. By responding to these triggers effectively, the service provider can build trust, rapport, and collaboration with the customer opportunities, and improvements to the service and deliver services that meet or exceed their expectations. BRM inputs: Inputs to BRM may include customer demand, strategies, requirements, technology innovations, agreements, and policies. For example: Customer demand is the driving force behind any business relationship. It informs what the customers want, need, and expect. Organizations need to understand their customers" demand Strategies are the plans and goals that guide our actions and decisions in the business relationship. They help us align our vision, mission, and values with the customer's expectations and needs. We need to communicate our strategies clearly and regularly to the customer and Requirements are the specifications and criteria that define the scope, quality, and performance of the products or services provided to the customer. They help organizations set realistic expectations, measure progress and outcomes, and manage risks and changes. There is a need to gather, analyze, and validate requirements with the customer to ensure they are feasible and patterns, preferences, and feedback to deliver value and satisfaction. ensure they are mutually beneficial. achievable.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship:  Management (BRM) 32 Technology innovations are the new or improved ways of doing things that enhance an organization's capabilities, efficiency, and effectiveness in the business relationship. They help create value, solve problems, and meet customer needs. Thereis a need to monitor, evaluate, and adopt technology innovations that are relevant, useful, and compatible with the customer's Agreements are formal or informal contracts that establish the roles, responsibilities, rights, and obligations of both parties in the business relationship. They help define the scope, terms, and conditions of the products or services provided to the customer. There is a need to negotiate, document, and review agreements with the customer and ensure they are fair, transparent, and Policies are the rules and guidelines that govern behavior and actions in the business relationship. They help maintain professionalism, ethics, and integrity in interactions with the customer. There is a need to follow, enforce, and update policies that are consistent, clear, and environment. compliant. respectful. Triggering events Inputs Business/customer need Voice of the customer (VOC) Scheduled review Feedback Customer demand Strategies Requirements Technology innovations Agreements Policies Other? Figure 4: Business Kelationship Management triggering events and inputs

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 33 Business Relationship Management: Terminating Events and Outputs The terminating events and outputs of the IT BRM process are the conditions or outcomes that indicate or signal the process is completed or stopped, as well as the products or services that are delivered or produced by the process. They help to define when and how the process ends. The following are possible terminating events: The business need has been addressed: This is when the IT BRM process has successfully delivered or enabled an IT solution that meets or exceeds the business need or opportunity that was identified and agreed upon by the IT and business stakeholders. For example, if the business need was to improve the customer experience by implementing a new customer relationship management (CRM) system, then the terminating event would be when the CRM system is fully deployed and operational, and the business benefits are realized and measured. A completed service review: This is when the IT BRM process has conducted a periodic or ad hoc review of the IT services and their performance, quality, value, and alignment with the business goals and needs. The review mayi involve collecting feedback from thel business stakeholders and customers, analyzing service metrics and reports, identifying issues and gaps, and recommending improvements or changes. For example, if the IT BRM process has reviewed the IT service portfolio and found that some services are no longer relevant or cost-effective for the business, then the terminating event would be when the services are retired or replaced by more Actioned feedback: This is when the IT BRM process has received and responded to feedback from the business stakeholders and customers regarding their satisfaction, expectations, and requirements for IT services and capabilities. The feedback may be positive or negative, formal or informal, solicited or unsolicited. The IT BRM process may use various methods to collect and analyze feedback such as surveys, interviews, focus groups, complaints, compliments, etc. The IT BRM process may also use various methods to action feedback such as acknowledging, thanking, resolving, escalating, communicating, etc. For example, if the IT BRM process has received a complaint from a business stakeholder about a service outage that affected their productivity, then the terminating event would be when the issue is resolved and communicated to the suitable alternatives. stakeholder. These are some outputs for BRM: Portfolio recommendations: These are suggestions for aligning the portfolio of products and services with the needs and expectations of the customers. Portfolio recommendations help to Agreements: These are formal or informal contracts that define the roles, responsibilities, expectations, and benefits of the relationship between the organization and the customer. Agreements help to establish trust, transparency, and accountability in the relationship. Business cases: These are documents that justify the investment in a product or service based on its expected costs, benefits, risks, and impacts. Business cases help to demonstrate the value and prioritize, optimize, and balance the value proposition of the organization. feasibility of the proposed solution.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. Management (BRM) 34 Customer satisfaction ratings: These are measures ofl how well the organization meets or exceeds the customer's needs and expectations. Customer satisfaction ratings help to evaluate the performance and quality of the products and services, as well as the relationship itself. Demand forecasting: This is a process of estimating the future demand for products and services based on historical data, market trends, customer feedback, and other factors. Demand forecasting helps to plan and allocate resources, as well as to identify opportunities and Opportunities for improvement: These are areas where the organization can enhance its products, services, or processes to increase customer satisfaction, loyalty, and retention. Opportunities for improvement help to foster continuous improvement and innovation in the challenges in the market. relationship. Terminating event Business/customer needs addressed Completed service review Acknowledged and actioned feedback Outputs Portfolior recommendations Agreements Business cases Customer satisfaction ratings Demand forecasting Opportunities for improvement Figure 5: Business Relationship Management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 35 Business/Customer Relationship Management: Themes and Activities Customer relationship management is a key theme of the business relationship management (BRM) process. CRM involves a set of activities that aim to understand, maintain, and improve the relationship between IT and its customers. CRM helps IT to align its services with the needs and expectations of the customers, and to deliver value and satisfaction. Some of the activities that fall under CRM are: Identifying needs: This activity involves gathering information about the current and future needs of the customers, as well as their preferences, goals, and challenges. This helps IT to design and offer services that meet customer requirements and add value to their business outcomes Signing up for services: This activity involves formalizing the agreement between IT and their customers for the provision of services. This includes defining the scope, quality, cost, and duration of the services, as well as the roles and responsibilities of both parties. This helps to establish a clear and mutual understanding, of what is expected from each other Conducting surveys: This activity involves collecting feedback from the customers about their satisfaction and perception of the services provided by IT. This helps IT measure its performance, identify gaps and areas for improvement, and recognize opportunities for innovation and Handling complaints: This activity involves resolving any issues or problems that the customers may face with the services provided by IT. This includes acknowledging, investigating, and resolving complaints in a timely and effective manner. This helps to restore the customer confidence and trust in IT and to prevent or minimize any negative impact on the business Business alignment is another theme of the business relationship management process. This theme covers the activities related to ensuring that IT services and solutions are aligned with the business needs, goals, and priorities such as establishing partnerships, communicating value, managing demand, facilitating resolution, and monitoring satisfaction. Business alignment is essential for building trust and credibility between IT and the business, as well as for delivering value-added outcomes that support the business strategy and objectives. Business alignment requires a proactive and collaborative approach from both IT and the business, along with a clear understanding of the business context, drivers, challenges, and opportunities. By aligning IT services and solutions with the business needs, goals, and priorities, the business relationship management process can help to optimize the use of IT resources, enhance the quality and performance of IT services, and increase the value perception and satisfaction of enhancement IT customers and stakeholders. Some possible activities for business relationship management are: New customer initiation and engagement Identify and prioritize the needs and expectations of the stakeholders Establish and maintain regular communication channels with the stakeholders Monitor and measure the satisfaction and value delivered to the stakeholders Provide feedback and recommendations for improvement to the service providers Facilitate the resolution ofi issues and conflicts between the stakeholders and the service providers Promote the benefits and value of the services offered by the service providers Conduct service review meetings

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 36 The following table represents a detailed review of some of these activities for business relationship management: Activity New customer initiation and engagement Description Identifying needs: When setting up the business relationship management process for a new customer, the following activities should be considered: Where the business relationship manager is new to the role, provide training on the scope of the capability as well as the roles and responsibilities of the business relationship manager. It's recommended to nominate a coach/mentor for the new appointee. Nominate an appropriate business relationship manager from within the service provider's management team, taking into account the nature of the customer'S business and the services that service providers have been Notify the customer representative of the appointment of a business relationship manager. Seek customer agreement regarding the appointee, engaged to provide. considering concerns such as: Conflicts of interest An insufficient security clearance A legal impediment A previous irreconcilable and adverse business relationship Prepare and provide an information package to the business relationship manager, detailing: Each customer's S business strategy a Each customer's business plan including service levels D Key customer contacts scope services interactions and confirm: The service provider services being offered to the customer, a Information on how the customer will be using the services a Related projects or other on-boarding activities Any vendors being engaged to assist with the delivery of the in Meet with the customer and establish the basis for engagement and The frequency of meetings and reports a Normal and escalation contact points meetings and service reviews a Contact details for the business relationship manager An agreed-upon date for the next and subsequent routine

Chapter 3: Business Relationship:  Management (BRM) 37 Activity Signing up: for services: Establish and maintain regular communication channels with the stakeholders Description This activity is broad and complex and encompasses a range of potential actions. The typical involvement of the business relationship manager is detailed below: Business and IT strategy development: Identification of the stakeholders in new strategic initiatives The definition of outcomes expected by the customer(s) represented Specification of strategic requirements and funding Defining the business cases for customer initiatives Validating the customer's expected business use of existing IT services and the demand for new services. Product and service planning, design, and development: Validating the customer S expected requirements and success criteria for Ensuring customer involvement in planning, design, and development Validating customer requirements against service design specifications Working with the product and service owner in release planning Coordinating customer involvement in service assurance and testing Scheduling customer training and awareness sessions new services activities Confirming costs and funding Release and deployment, assurance, and testing: activities (e.g. testing, acceptance) Validating release schedules Understanding and communicating thei implication of any known issues identified Service delivery and operations: Communicating scheduled outages Providing updates on major incidents Acting as an escalation point for the customer Continuous improvement: Reporting service performance Reviewing customer satisfaction survey results Facilitating strategic service reviews Initiating improvement plans

Chapter 3: Business Relationship:  Management (BRM) 38 Activity Conducting surveys: Service review meetings Description In conjunction with product and service owners and service level management, schedule and conduct formal service reviews of the state of the relationship and service performance with the customer. These reviews should be conducted annually, or more frequently, where a change to the customer or relationship would justify a formal review. Such Significant changes in the customer S organization structure (e.g-, a merger, divestiture, acquisition, relocation, restructure) Replacement of a C-level executive representing the customer Significant changes in the customer's business strategy that has implications for service provider service demand and/or performance A sustained underperformance by the service provider The customer organization's adverse internal or external audit reports The formal reviews should proceed according to a published agenda with the review meeting, actions, and decisions being recorded and published in minutes of the meeting. Items for discussion at the formal review should The status of undertakings made at the previous review Service performance for the period since the last review The customer's satisfaction with the relationship management being Identification of opportunities for improvement or additional assistance The customer business strategy and any emerging IT requirements The service provider strategy and alignment with the customer needs Action items arising from the formal review should be examined by the business relationship manager and the appropriate process or service owner responsible for the action items that were identified. Minutes of the meeting should be circulated to all process and service owners with actions and situations may include: include: undertaken Upcoming activities, initiatives, and projects timeframes clearly specified.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship:  Management (BRM) 39 Activity Handling complaints Description A key activity of the business relationship management process in support of improving relationship and building trust is focused on addressing and following up on complaints. This activity is vital for maintaining a positive relationship between the business and its customers. Here are possible steps a BRM role might action the process of handling complaints: Acknowledgment and documentation: Swiftly acknowledge complaints and thoroughly document details to include the issue, customer information, and Investigation and collaboration: Collaborate with relevant IT teams to investigate the root cause by analyzing technical aspects and reviewing Transparent communication: Maintain open and transparent communication with the customer by providing updates on the investigation Efficient resolution: Coordinate efforts to resolve the issue promptly by suggesting solutions, allocating resources, and escalating if needed. Timely follow-up: Confirm resolution within agreed timelines and conduct follow-ups to ensure customer satisfaction and gather feedback. Learning for improvement: Analyze the complaint-handling process for learning, identifying recurring issues, and suggesting process improvements. Rebuilding trust: Focus on rebuilding customer trust by proactive communication and demonstrating a commitment to preventing future Documentation and reporting: Maintain comprehensive records of the complaint, actions taken, resolutions provided, and follow-up steps for These actionable steps within the complaint resolution process, when executed effectively, help restore customer confidence, prevent negative impacts on business, and foster stronger relationships between IT services context. SLAs. and resolution progress. occurrences. analysis and reporting. and customers.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 40 Business Relationship Management: Actors and Roles The IT business relationship management process involves several actors who have different roles and Customer(s): The customer is a group or organization that receives and uses the IT services and who pays for them or has a formal agreement with the service provider. The customer organization defines their needs and expectations for the IT services and provides feedback on their satisfaction Customer representative(s) (CR) is a designated point of contact that has the authority to represent and speak on behalf of the customer organization. The customer representative establishes service requirements, participates in the negotiation and agreement of service level targets and requirements, and escalates issues or complaints when necessary. The CR may also participate in providing feedback on product and service design outcomes deriving from sprints or projects. IT leaders: The IT leaders are the senior managers or executives who are responsible for the overall direction, strategy, and governance of the IT organization. The IT leaders ensure the IT organization has the capabilities, resources, and alignment to deliver value to the customers and to support their business objectives. The IT leaders also sponsor and support the IT business relationship management process and communicate with the customers at a strategic level. The service owner: The service owner is the person who is accountable for the delivery and management of a specific IT service or product. The service owner ensures the service or product meets the agreed-upon SLA and quality standards and that it is aligned with the customer's needs and expectations. The service owner also coordinates with other service owners and process owners The business relationship manager: The business relationship manager is the person who acts as the primary liaison between the customer and the IT organization. The business relationship manager establishes, maintains, and improves the relationship with the customer and understands their business needs, challenges, and opportunities. The business relationship manager also facilitates the communication, collaboration, and coordination between the customer and the IT organization and manages the demand, portfolio, and value of the IT services or products. The service level manager: The service level manager is the person who is responsible for defining, negotiating, monitoring, reporting, and reviewing the SLAs for the IT services or products. The service level manager ensures the SLAs are aligned with the customer's requirements, expectations, and value proposition and that they are consistent with the IT organization's capabilities, resources, and strategy. The service level manager also manages any issues or disputes related to SLAs and responsibilities. Here is a brief description of each actor: and perception of value. to ensure end-to-end service delivery and integration. initiates improvement actions when needed.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. Management (BRM) 41 The organizational roles engaged in business relationship management (BRM) may comprise many roles that collaborate in the context of business customer engagement. For example: A business relationship role may be filled by a dedicated resource focused on meeting with and engaging with business customers on a regular basis as well as during times of unexpected service outages. Or this role may be fulfilled by a product and/or service owner or senior service executive depending on the structure and the scale of the organization. The key principle being that a role or roles are established to meet on a proactive, intentional, and trequent basis with business customer contacts to establish, develop, and Other traditional roles within IT service providers that work with and support the goals of business improve the relationship between the service provider and their service customers. relationship management include: Project managers Business analysts Product and service owners Service delivery managers Enterprise architects Service line owners The scope for internal and external service providers will often be different. The scope and resources allocated to BRM will depend on the size of an organization. However, regardless of the organization's size, the roles and objectives of BRM apply to any organization and can scale to ensure there is ongoing It is not uncommon for larger organizations to have multiple dedicated business relationship managers (BRMS) where each is assigned to one or more business units. Small organizations may have a single business relationship manager who works with all business units. The key is to ensure the BRMS have enough time allocated to fulfill their roles and responsibilities. Or, as indicated earlier, the role of BRM may be covered by other roles such as product and service owners or senior service line owners. For internal service providers, business relationship management is typically executed between a senior representative from IT (larger organizations may have dedicated BRMS) and senior managers (customers) from the business units. Here the emphasis is on aligning the objectives of the business with For external service providers, business relationship management is often executed by a separate and dedicated function of BRMS or account managers  each one dedicated to a customer or a group of smaller customers. The emphasis here is on maximizing the contract value through customer satisfaction. alignment and realignment with the business based on its current and future needs. the activity of the service provider.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) 42 Example detailed role description: The role of the business relationship manager is to establish, manage, and improve positive relationships with the customer through intentional and proactive engagement with the following responsibilities to: Develop and maintain the service provider relationshipby being the liaison between the customer and the IT service provider and to: Understand and convey the customer needs to the service provider Manage the relationship with the customer following the two guiding principles of: Support the business customer through the creation of the business case documentation Participate in customer strategic meetings to gain an understanding of the future direction and Communicate the service provider capabilities, news, events, and plans to the customer a No IT service surprises for customers No customer surprises for the service provider strategic objectives Define the customer service requirements and the success criteria the service provider services and upcoming events of interest upon service requirements of what the customer wants the service to do a Consulting with leadership about organizational change management communication. If necessary, creates the communication vehicle Monitoring the effectiveness of communication Manage conflict and complaints Attend the regular customer internal meetings (at an agreed trequency) to provide updates on Work closely with the service owner to ensure IT has the ability to meet the defined and agreed Support organizational change activities such as: Creating the communication plan and encouragingnudging leaders about Coordinating with other departments and/or business units about communications and Ensuring the customer is ready for the release, such as when they have received proper change progress training and communications Identify the business process life cycle patterns Periodically audit/review the process and provide feedback to the BRM process owner Assist with audits of the BRM management activities for compliance with established policies Produce reports and management information that includes impact analysis reports and BRM Work with service level management to ensure the service level requirements are defined, agreed and procedures management status reports Confirm costs and funding upon, and documented in a service level agreement Communicate scheduled outages Validate release schedules Act as an escalation point for customers Provide updates on major incidents Participate in internal service review meetings Facilitate ongoing service review meetings with the customer

Chapter 3: Business Relationship: I Management (BRM) Conduct customer satisfaction assessments 43 Work with service owners, and other key stakeholders to evaluate the results of the customer satisfaction survey and respond to the results that may lead to improvement plans The key skills of al BRM role include: Strategic and systems thinking Business analysis and problem-solving Written and verbal communications Emotional intelligence Persuasion/negotiation Close working relationships at a strategic level are critical. Possessing the appropriate skills within organizational change management as well as understanding business needs are a must. Business Relationship Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Critical success factors (CSFs) and key performance indicators (KPIS) are essential tools for business relationship management (BRM). CSFs are the strategic goals or objectives that BRM aims to achieve, while KPIS are the measurable outcomes or metrics that indicate the progress and performance of BRM. By defining CSFs and KPIS, BRM can align its activities and resources with the business needs and expectations, monitor and evaluate its effectiveness and efficiency, and demonstrate its value and contribution to the organization. CSFs and KPIs also help BRM to communicate clearly and consistently with its stakeholders, identify and address gaps or issues, and foster continuous improvement and Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: The percentage of satisfaction of business partners with IT services and capabilities innovation. KPIS: The: number of positive survey results that meet target CSF: The percentage of frequency and quality of interactions between IT and business KPIS: The number and duration of meetings, calls, emails, etc. between IT and business The number of feedback received from both parties on the outcomes and value of these partners interactions

Chapter 3: Business Relationship:  Management (BRM) 44 CSF: An ability to identify changes to the customer business context that could potentially impact the requirements and success criteria of services offered KPIs: The percentage reduction in changes affecting the customer environment without the customer, S prior knowledge and agreement CSF: An ability to document and understand customer requirements and the business outcomes they wish to achieve KPIS: The percentage increase in customer business requirements and success criteria that are documented and signed off CSF: Customer satisfaction levels with services are known and acted upon to improve service quality. KPIs: The percentage reduction in the number of customer complaints and escalations

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. I Management (BRM) 45 Business Relationship Management: Integrations The process integrations needed between business relationship management and other processes are essential for ensuring that the services delivered by the service provider meet the needs and expectations of the customers and stakeholders. There are key process integrations to undertake: Business relationship management and request management: This integration enables the business relationship manager to understand the demand patterns and trends of the customers and to communicate them to the service provider. The request management process also provides feedback to the business relationship manager on the performance and satisfaction of the customers with the services delivered: A strategic request for non-standard or new service offerings that enter through a request management channel will be shared with business relationship management for a Business relationship management and service level management: This integration ensures that the service level agreements (SLAs) and service level objectives (SLOs) are aligned with the business outcomes and requirements of the customers. The business relationship manager works with the service level manager to negotiate, agree, monitor, and review the SLAs and SLOs and response and subsequent follow-up with key business customers. to manage any issues or disputes that may arise: The BRM capability works very closely with service level management as a key dependency to manage customer expectations and achieve the goals of business The BRM capability works with customer organizations in conjunction with product/service owners to establish business requirements and success criteria to Business relationship management and portfolio management: This integration helps the business relationship manager to influence the strategic direction and priorities of the service provider based on the input and feedback from the customers and stakeholders. The portfolio management process also supports the business relationship manager in communicating the value proposition and benefits of the services to the customers as well as managing their relationship management. establish agreed-upon service targets. expectations and perceptions: The BRM process provides a primary channel to support strategic demand capture, forecasting, and influencing to provide portfolio and resource management key Portfolio and resource management provides the BRM with updates to give to the business customers with respect to the status, timelines, and limitations of the service information for planning, funding, and resourcing decisions. provider organization regarding customer demands and requirements.

Chapter 3: Business Relationship. I Management (BRM) 46 Business Relationship Management: Enablers Enablers are essential components of any business process because they help to optimize the performance and outcomes of the process. In the context of BRM, enablers are the factors or elements that support or facilitate the collaboration and alignment between IT and business stakeholders. Some examples of enablers for BRM are: Tools and technology: These are the software applications, hardware devices, platforms, or systems that enable IT and business to communicate, share information, manage projects, monitor progress, and deliver value. For instance, a customer relationship management system can help IT and business to track and manage customer interactions, feedback, and satisfaction. A project management tool can help IT and the business to plan, execute, and control IT projects and initiatives. A dashboard or a reporting tool can help IT and the business to measure and Resources: These are the human, financial, or physical assets that enable IT and business to execute the IT BRM process. For example, human resources include the IT BRM role, which is responsible for building and maintaining strategic relationships with business partners, understanding their needs and expectations, and ensuring that IT delivers value to them. Financial resources include thel budget allocated forl IT BRM activities such as conducting surveys, organizing workshops, or sponsoring events. Physical resources include the infrastructure, equipment, or facilities that enable IT and business to collaborate effectively, such as meeting Process documentation: This is the set of documents that define and describe the IT BRM process such asi its purpose, scope, objectives, roles and responsibilities, inputs and outputs, activities and tasks, metrics and indicators, risks and issues, or best practices. Process documentation helps to standardize and streamline the IT BRM process, ensure its consistency and quality across different units or domains, provide guidance and reference for IT BRM practitioners and evaluate the performance and value of IT services and solutions rooms, video conferencing systems, or co-working spaces stakeholders, and facilitate its continuous improvement and optimization. Other potential enablers of IT BRM include: Culture: This is the set of values, beliefs, norms, or behaviors that shape the way IT and business interact with each other. A positive and collaborative culture can foster trust, respect, openness, transparency, mutual understanding, and a shared vision between IT and business Governance: This is the framework or mechanism that defines and regulates the roles, responsibilities, authorities, accountabilities, decision-making processes, or escalation procedures for BRM. A clear and effective governance can ensure that BRM is aligned with the strategic goals and priorities of the organization, supported by senior management sponsorship and Strategy: This is the plan or road map that outlines the vision, mission, goals, objectives, initiatives, or actions for BRM. A coherent and realistic strategy can help BRM identify and prioritize the keyl business: needs and opportunities for IT value creation, define and communicate the value proposition of IT to business partners, and align the IT capabilities and resources with endorsement, and integrated with other organizational processes or functions the business requirements and expectations.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management A service catalog refers to a published list of services and/or products available from a service provider. The list of services within the service catalog represents the services that are currently available and represents a subset of the total list of services tracked in the provider's S service portfolio. Service Catalog Management: Purpose and Objectives Purpose: The purpose of the service catalog management process is to ensure that an actionable service catalog is produced and maintained that contains accurate and stakcholder-relevant information on all IT services available for use by a business or customer organization. The service catalog process has the following objectives: Provide and maintain a single source of consistent information on all available services Publish and communicate service level targets and agreements related to services to support the Support the request management process by enabling users and partners to find the services and Enable IT to more effectively plan for the demand and supply of services and resources Communicate the services that are available from IT, linking these services to business operations in the language and metrics that are relevant to the business goals and results Enable customer engagement by making the service catalog actionable and relevant sO that it is perceived as useful and is used by the customer organization goals of service level management service options they are looking for and initiate a request Benefits of service catalog include:

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 48 Enhanced service visibility and accessibility: Provides a clear overview of available services and Improved service management effectiveness: Streamlines service delivery processes to enhance Optimized use of IT service capabilities: Empowers informed decision-making by offering comprehensive service details, entitlements, and dependencies to maximize the utilization of available Enhanced user satisfaction: Ensures published service options and performance expectations to elevate Cost effectiveness: Encourages the use of standard services over custom options to reduce complexity, Alignment with business goals: Fosters alignment between IT services and business objectives to ensure Increased accountability and transparency: Publishes clear service levels and responsibilities to foster Facilitates change management: Supports smooth communication and the adoption of new or updated Risk mitigation: Addresses security and compliance requirements to effectively mitigate risks associated enables stakeholders to easily access and understand service offerings efficiency and accuracy in service provisioning and management IT services the overall user experience and satisfaction levels mitigate risks, and improve scalability, which lead to cost savings strategic synergy and relevance accountability and transparency between service providers and users services to aid in change management processes within the organization with IT services, data, and vulnerabilities

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 49 Service Catalog Management: Policies officially by a group of people or a business organization"s "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed upon It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy Statement One source The reason for the policy To ensure a single source of information. for available IT services is provided; the service catalog will provide a single point of access to services bringing together different functional areas and external service providers into one digital channel Benefits Avoid confusion by stakeholders looking for information on available services in different locations Consistency in how information. is provided, searched for, and used Optimize the technology used to publish and action the service catalog Optimize the value of the practice and service catalog Provide the necessary information required by service catalog users Build trust and confidence in the data found in the service catalog. One published service catalog will be provided throughout the organization. Information validation Information published and maintained in the service catalog shall be assessed and validated for its usefulness and relevance to stakeholders. To ensure the service catalog is used effectively, the information. must be accurate, up-to-date, and relevant for the target audience 6 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy." Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 50 Policy Statement Service naming convention Service naming conventions should not reference specific products or applications. Service naming conventions should not reference specific vendors or functional groups. The reason for the policy Specific products and applications will change over time. This will cause the service structure'of the catalog to become inconsistent over For example, email service'is timeless and will not require changing if the tool changes from MS Outlook to Gmail. Services will be provided by different vendors and functions over time. The service names should remain agnostic to organizational structure or To ensure the consistent and quality management of information. for available IT services that includes information. from other ITSM processes. For example: information regarding service levels, security requirements, IT asset management and request requirements. Benefits The service names will reflect the outcome or value provided. The service catalog naming conventions will enable flexibility and enduring names that do not have to be changed frequently. Adopting service naming conventions that are agnostic to technology and functional structures allows for the definition of a many-to-one relationship. time. vendors. Integrated service catalogs One service catalog management approach integrated with other ITSM processes will be utilized throughout the organization. Ensures that service catalogs are not published in isolation from other ITSM processes Consistency in how information. is managed the Optimize efficiency, effectiveness, and value of the service catalog to support business goals

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 51 Service Catalog Management: Terms and Definitions Actionable service catalog: An ability to create requests, report inconsistencies and suggestions, or find additional information about services (knowledge management) directly through the service catalog Service catalog: The service catalog is an actionable published list of available services and their corresponding service offerings. It provides a primary channel to support demand capture/provisioning demand shaping, and customer experience management. The service catalog may include information Catalog view: Custom views for different groups of users (such as IT service providers, internal customers, external customers, specific user and customer groups, vendors, contractors, etc.) that facilitate a clear understanding for the part of the service catalog that is relevant to them; some catalog views could require authentication and should be defined to align to the given organization and its Request catalog: The request catalog is a collection of identified requests that users can submit via an ITSM solution that allows users to browse, select, and submit requests for various services and resources. It includes a list of predefined request types such as access to applications, hardware, software, and a network, as well as the option to capture feedback or support preapproved changes. The request catalog supports a user self-service strategy by enabling users to initiate and track their own requests, without having to contact the IT department or wait for approvals. This reduces the workload of the IT staff and improves the efficiency and satisfaction of the users. The request catalog is best understood as a subset of a full or complete service catalog focused on enabling end user requests. Request catalog attributes about deliverables, prices, contact points, ordering, and request processes. security policies. include: A collection of identified requests that users can submit Helps standardize the request process and improve the efficiency and quality of service delivery Allows users to browse through available IT services, hardware, software, and support options Product: Tangible or digital goods that are created, manufactured, and sold to meet specific needs; an integrated grouping of resources that consists of one or more of the data, hardware, software, facilities, and people that provides a solution to satisfy a stated need or objective; products can be physical, virtual, Service category: A service category is a logical grouping of services that benefit from being managed together. These high-level groupings should be meaningful to the IT service provider (i.e., to facilitate Service offering: The descriptions of the services that an organization provides to its customers and stakeholders along with their features, benefits, costs, and terms and conditions. Services and service offerings help to communicate the value proposition and scope of the service to the customers and Provides access to the IT resources available within an organization or hybrid budgeting and governance of services). stakeholders.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management the outcomes achieved by a service customer: 52 IT service: A service is a description of the value-based exchange of the outputs of a service provider and The value-based exchange refers to the tangible and intangible outputs or deliverables that a service provider makes available to service consumers to enable outcomes or results that a Service outputs are related to the activities, resources, and digital automation solutions provided The service combines people, processes, and technology products/solutions to provide outputs or results that enable business capabilities or an end user's work activities and desired outcomes. Multiple related services are grouped in a service category. See also service category and service Note: By this definition, a service is a capability and is not limited to a technology solution or a vertical IT system: A combination of interacting elements organized and maintained to achieve one or more Note: The technology system is the complete composite of IT components from various domains which, when brought together in a relationship, represent a value-added technology solution; for example, a local area network or an application system such as an enterprise resource planning solution. A system does not refer to the application as a stand-alone element but to all the components that build the Service component: A part of a service or system (e.g., hardware or software) that can be uniquely Technical and professional services: When defining IT services, it is necessary to understand there are two basic types of services that IT provides. These two types can be loosely classified as either technical A technical service is defined as a technology-based capability that the customer consumes or uses to facilitate a business process or function. It can also be a component service that supports another IT service that IS customer facing. Technical services can be further understood as either application services customer wishes to achieve. by the IT service provider. Intangible offerings that involve expertise, support, or assistance offering. domain such as a server environment or a business application. stated purposes. complete solution (application, databases, servers, and middleware, etc.). identified and used to deliver or support the service or professional services. or infrastructure services. Examples of technical/digital services: ERP services eCommerce Memsagingcolaboration File/print Hosting/compute Office productivity Desktop services Voice/data LAN

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 53 A professional service is defined as the value-added activities that IT staff provide to support, maintain, monitor, or ensure the consistent and reliable delivery of the technical services. Examples of professional services: Architecture and engineering Security Continuity IT support Project management services Procurement services Application development services Note: It is best practice to: name thel business (application-based) service as closely as possible to the name of the business process it supports. This will be a critical step in understanding the business impact of an When the IT service names are aligned with business processes, both the business customer and IT staff have a clearer understanding of how technology is aligned to meet business objectives. Service Catalog Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events for the service catalog changes and updates may include: IT service or component failure. Triggering events: New IT service introduction Changes to existing IT services New service offerings Changed service levels and service attributes New IT service introduction: The incorporation of a technology or professional service that has recently been released to live use from the service portfolio or is included based on the addition of a new third party or partner service; examples may include the introduction of fresh capabilities or technologies such as cloud-based services, cybersecurity enhancements, or expanded data analytics tools, prompting Changes to existing IT services: Modifications in service attributes leading to changes in published service functionality, entitlement, or service levels; for example: modifying an existing service like upgrading the network infrastructure to improve data security and bandwidth for increased New service offerings: New standard service offerings are made available and published in the service catalog based on user personas or use cases. For example, introducing novel technological solutions like cybersecurity training workshops or data analytics consulting to address emerging needs within the service expansion and user education performance organization

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 54 Changed service levels and service attributes: Revisions to service agreements that include alterations in response times, availability, or quality standards and necessitate communication and adaptation within the IT support model; for example, altering the service levels by upgrading customer support response times from 24/7 to real-time to better meet evolving user expectations and demands for efficiency Triggering events Inputs Newl IT service introduction Changes to existing IT services New service offerings Changed service levels and service attributes Available services from internallexternal partners Business information: and requirements Customer use cases or personas SLAi information Workfows/procedures Requested services and service offerings Costs and billingi information Figure 6: Service catalog management triggering events and inputs Inputs into the design and publishing of a service catalog include: Inputs: Available services from internal and external partners Business information and requirements Typical customer use cases or personas Service level agreement information Costs and billing information Workflows/procoedures from all other ITSM process areas Frequently requested services and service offerings Available services from internal and external partners: Compiling a comprehensive inventory of services offered internally and externally that enables the presentation of a full range of value-added services provided by the IT service organization to meet business and customer needs Business information and requirements: Incorporating specific business goals, objectives, and operational necessities into the service catalog design to ensure that IT services align precisely with Typical customer use cases or personas: Tailoring service catalog views, information, and attributes based on typical customer personas and their specific requirements for IT services and business functions Service level agreement information: Publishing agreed-upon performance metrics, response times, availability, and responsibilities between the service provider and the customer within thes service catalog organizational strategies to ensure clarity and accountability

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 55 Worklowsprocedures from all other ITSM process areas: Integrating information from various IT service management (ITSM) processes to ensure consistency, efficiency, and seamless connections Frequently requested services and service offerings: Streamlining the management and addressing of inquiries or requests related to frequently sought-after services by customers, end users, or stakeholders Costs and billing information: Including details about the pricing structure, billing procedures, and any associated costs with each service to enable transparent financial planning and decision-making Service Catalog Management: Terminating Events and Outputs between different areas of service delivery through a structured system within the catalog The following list provides examples of service catalog terminating events. Terminating events: A published service in the service catalog An updated or addition of a modified service offering Communication to business and customer stakeholders of changed service catalog elements Communication to the internal IT service organization of new standard services and service A published service in the service catalog: A new service is published and made available to business and customer stakeholders with respect to the relevant information needed for each stakeholder group. An update or addition or a modified service offering: Making changes to an existing service within the Communication to business and customer stakeholders about changed service catalog elements: Notifying business and customer stakeholders about any alterations, updates, or additions within the service catalog to ensure they are aware of how these changes might impact their operations or the Communication to the internal IT service organization of new standard services and service offerings: Informing the internal IT service teams about newly established standard services or modifications to existing ones to ensure the organization is aligned with the latest offerings and can provide consistent offerings catalog services available to them support to customers and stakeholders. Outputs of the service catalog management process include: Outputs: Published service catalog Inputs into IT strategy and planning Service descriptions and details Communications and notifications Internal and external service partner alignment

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 56 The published service catalog: A comprehensive document outlining all available IT services to facilitate Input into IT strategy and planning: Information used to shape the IT strategy to aid in strategic decision-making by providing insights into available services and their potential impact on Service descriptions and details: Detailed information about each service that includes features, scope, dependencies, service levels, and costs to ensure stakeholders have a comprehensive understanding of Communications and notifications: Strategies and documents for transparently informing stakeholders about changes, updates, or additions to the service catalog to ensure alignment with organizational Internal and external service partner alignment: Communication channels and shared information that ensure both internal and external service partners are synchronized with new or modified services to stakeholder understanding and access to the spectrum of offerings organizational goals the services available objectives enable seamless integration and support provision across the organization Terminating events Outputs Published service in the service catalog Updated or addition of a modified service offering Communication of changed service catalog elements Communication of new standard services and service offerings Published service catalog Inputs into IT strategy and planning Service descriptions and details Communications and notifications Internal and external service partner alignment Figure 7: Service catalog management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 57 Service Catalog Management: Themes and Activities Key themes related to service catalog management include: A clarity of services and service offerings: A holistic IT service catalog serves as a foundational tool not only for publishing available IT services but also for nurturing strong customer relationships. By offering a comprehensive view of available services, it becomes an invaluable resource in managing customer expectations. It ensures clear insights into the breadth and depth of IT services on offer, their specific scopes, and detailed service offerings. The improved transparency enabled by a service catalog becomes a cornerstone for fostering trust and understanding between service providers and customers because it aligns their expectations effectively. This, in turn, enhances customer satisfaction because services are delivered in line with the defined offerings to minimize misunderstandlings and discrepancies. Improved service alignment: Adopting a customer-centric approach in publishing IT services within a service catalog serves as a focusing activity that guides an IT service organization toward its mission goals. By strategically framing IT services from an outside-in perspective  one that resonates with the needs and expectations of the customers  it becomes a powerful tool for validation and alignment. A customer-focused lens on services not only validates the relevance of IT services but also ensures their Streamlined demand management: A well designed service catalog, rooted in customer-centric use cases and personas, becomes a catalyst for informed decision-making regarding frequently requested services. By clearly outlining service offerings aligned with distinct customer needs, it empowers strategic This proactive approach shapes and influences customer demand by promoting the utilization of standardized service offerings over custom solutions. As a result, it cultivates a culture where customers are inclined to opt for standardized services that address their needs by reducing the necessity for custom-tailored solutions. This deliberate shift away from customized solutions not only simplifies operations but also significantly diminishes complexity and risk. Consequently, the reduction of complexity improves overall scalability and flexibility. Ultimately, an emphasis on standardized service offerings within the catalog not only optimizes resource allocation but also fosters an environment An enhanced user experience provides a user-friendly interface for users to explore available services, request them easily, and track their status, thereby enhancing user satisfaction. This is accomplished direct alignment with the overarching goals and objectives of the organization. decision-makers to effectively anticipate and cater to common demands. conducive to scalability, adaptability, and sustainable growth. through: Improved transparency and accountability: Promotes transparency by outlining service levels, responsibilities, and expected outcomes to ensure accountability among service providers Streamlined service delivery: Helps streamline service delivery processes to reduce service delivery time, minimize errors, and improve the overall service quality

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management Examples of service catalog activities include: 58 Activity A clarity of services and service offerings: Gather stakeholder requirements Description This activity is performed as part of defining the IT service catalog service. An important aspect for this activity is to find stakeholders both within the provider organization(s) and the consumer organization(s). Other processes will also be key stakeholders of the service catalog and will have requirements to enable their processes goals and support effective and efficient execution. In particular, the request management process typically depends on a service catalog as a single point of access Within the consumers, different groups will have specific requirements to make their interactions with the provider more efficient and effective In all cases, it's critical to understand the use cases from all stakeholder perspectives to optimize the value of the service catalog. Service catalog management works in collaboration with the service owners and service level management (and by association with customers) to identify the IT services and agree upon the naming, descriptions, and relevant details related to service offerings for inclusion The service catalog process ensures that service and product descriptions are expressed clearly in nontechnical terms to support customer engagement and service delivery. The service catalog is typically an online portal or tool that enables the current list of services to be and supporting technology for the request catalog. through the use of the service catalog. Improved service alignment: Document service descriptions in the service catalog. communicated to customers.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 59 Activity Streamlined demand management: Define service catalog views Description A key design consideration for a service catalog is that a user's view is filtered based on a list of services they are entitled to. In addition, the user should be able to customize this filtered view based on their specific point-in-time needs. Filters should also be associated with Views are defined based on the specific audiences or personas that require certain service catalog information and processes based on their The service catalog must be capable of providing different views and appropriate search processes. unique roles and interests. levels of detail to different stakeholders: The full list of services within a service catalog may not be applicable to all customers and/or users. Likewise, the various attributes of services such as technical specifications, offerings, agreements, costs, etc. are not applicable to all consumer types. D User views: Provides information on requestable service Business/customer views: Provides service level information and options, as well as financial and regulatory considerations Internal IT or partner views: Provides technical, process, regulatory, risk, and security information While multiple views of the service catalog are possible, the creation of separate or isolated service catalogs within different technology groups should be avoided, if possible, because it will promote segregation, Views are one way of managing communications about what services are available to a specific group or constituency. This can be implemented in a low-tech manner such as allowing visitors to the website to sort services based on their role. A more automated solution could leverage an organization's access management technology and controls to automatically filter and display relevant services and content based on the person's role. Example views can include: offerings and provisioning details variability, and complexity.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 60 Activity Streamlined demand management: Publish and manage the service catalog Description The service catalog process is responsible for documenting, publishing, and managing service descriptions and details related to service offerings. It provides a scope of what services are available and on what The service catalog process is supported by roles such as the service owner as well as the resources responsible for managing, editing, and keeping the service catalog up to date and relevant to stakeholder needs. The service catalog process publishes the agreed-upon and up-to-date details of how and when IT services are delivered based on business requirements established as the output of the service level management For the service catalog to be perceived as useful by the customer organization, it must do more than provide a static platform for Unless the IT service catalog enables customer engagement by enabling discussions related to standard and non-standard service offerings and/or automates the request and order fulfilment processes, the chances of its ongoing adoption as a useful and meaningful resource is minimal. For this reason, many organizations establish a view of the service catalog that's focused on the consumable or orderable elements of service terms. process. Enhance the user experience: Ensure the service catalog is actionable and used publishing information. about IT services. offerings and is often called a request catalog. Service Catalog Management: Actors and Roles In IT service catalog management, there are several key actors and roles that contribute to its effective The service catalog manager: Responsible for overseeing the entire life cycle of the service catalog that includes its design, implementation, updates, and continuous improvement; this role ensures the catalog Service owners: Individuals accountable for specific services within the catalog; they ensure their services are well-defined, meet service level agreements, and are aligned with business requirements. Service owners may collaborate with various teams to maintain and enhance their services The service portfolio owner: Manages the overall service portfolio to ensure services are strategically aligned with the organization's goals and objectives; this role involves analyzing the performance of services, making decisions on service retirement or introduction, and optimizing the portfolio IT service management (ITSM) process owners: These individuals oversee various ITSM processes that intersect with the service catalog, such as change management, incident management, and request management. They ensure these processes align with the services defined in the catalog implementation and ongoing management. Here are some of the primary actors: aligns with business objectives and meets user needs

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 61 The business relationship manager (BRM): Acts as a liaison between IT and business stakeholders to understand the business needs and translate them into service requirements; the BRM ensures the Technical specialists/subject matter experts (SMES): Experts in specific technical areas or services offered within the catalog; they provide technical expertise, contribute to service design, and ensure that End users and customers: While not traditional roles within the management process, end users and customers play a crucial role in providing feedback, using the services, and influencing service These roles collaborate to design, implement, maintain, and continuously improve the IT service catalog to ensure it remains aligned with business objectives and delivers value to stakeholders. All the processes encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include the services offered align with the business strategy and contribute to business value services meet technical requirements and standards improvements or introductions based on their needs. following: The service catalog manager: The service catalog manager oversees the entire life cycle of the service catalog to ensure it aligns with the business needs and maintains accuracy and relevance. In addition to general managerial duties, their specific responsibilities include: Editorial and publishing oversight: The service catalog manager collaborates with the service owner and service portal/service catalog solutions team to ensure the consistent, timely, and accurate use of service definition taxonomy, structure, and policy. For example, they validate the descriptions and specifications of services (like cloud-hosting services or collaboration and content management services) comply with standardized formats and accurately represent each Service catalog service ownership: This individual fulfills the role of the service catalog service owner to undertake all responsibilities associated with service ownership. For instance, they take charge of defining service attributes to ensure alignment with the organizational goals and Usage and feedback reporting: This provides usage and feedback reports to information providers contributing to the service catalog. They collect, analyze, and present data-driven insights to service owners to highlight service requests, utilization patterns, and user feedback to drive continuous improvements. For instance, they might identify that a particular service experiences high demand during specific business cycles to prompt the service owner to optimize service's scope and offerings. manage service-related feedback and improvements. their resource capacity or upgrade features accordingly.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management Service and product owners: Their roles involve: 62 Service and product owners are responsible for specific services or products offered within the catalog. Information contributions to the service catalog: Service owners provide relevant, accurate, and up-to-date information for their respective services within the catalog; for instance, a service owner for data backup and recovery ensures the service description, specifications, and service level agreements (SLAs) for this particular service are well-defined and aligned with user needs Usage and feedback reports: Service and product owners utilize usage and feedback reports generated by the service catalog; for example, a product owner for a software solution reviews user feedback related to existing service offerings to identify areas for enhancement or potential feature additions to ensure the product meets customer needs and expectations. Service Catalog Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Customer awareness and use of the service catalog KPIs: The percentage increase in service catalog page hits CSF: Customers are satisfied with the service catalog. KPIs: The percentage increase in customer satisfaction and experience scores for using the service catalog CSF: The service catalog is being used. KPIS: The percentage increase in user feedback stating that the catalog met their needs The percentage increase in other process activities being initiated from the service catalog, such as an increase in the percentage of requests initiated from the service catalog

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management CSF: An accurate service catalog 63 KPIS: The percentage increase in the number of services recorded and managed against those The percentage reduction in the number of variances detected between the information The percentage reduction in the number of services that are retired but still reflected in The percentage reduction in the number of services for which the information in the The percentage increase in the number of end users that feel the service catalog is up to The percentage increase in the frequency at which the information. stored in service being delivered and transitioned in the live environment contained within the service catalog and the real-world situation the service catalog service catalog is not in sync with that in service portfolio date catalog is updated Service Catalog Management: Integrations The following describes key areas where service catalog management integrates with other processes. Incident management: Service classification aids in incident categorization. Allows for the better prioritization of incidents using service level information provided in the Business and IT escalation contacts for incidents are available in the service catalog. The service catalog provides published information on the channels and options to request and Incident management provides information and status updates to services affected by an incident service catalog receive support for service disruption. (e.g., via the service portal). Request management: Service FAQs can be answered in the service catalog. Enables streamlined, standardized, and automated workflows process for onboardingofboarcing employees. The service catalog provides a publishing platform to enable consumer access to service offerings. Key customer controls can be embedded in the service catalog; for example, enabling an HR The service catalog provides published details related to service offerings and their requestable Catalog management provides request management user information. and feedback for the ease of use and the value of request information and workflow added to the catalog. Request management provides the request information and related workflow (ifa appropriate) for elements. inclusion in the service catalog.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management Service level management: 64 The service catalog serves as the key communication tool for agreed-upon targets such as service availability to provision timelines, incident response and resolution, and others. Iti is al key source of information when discussing service usage and levels with customers. It can present historical service level information. and access to service reports. It makes service provider, support, and customer contact information available. It] provides the available service levels for offerings. Change management: Aids in routing requests that are preapproved changes Uses the service catalog to evaluate the potential impact and value of proposed changes Communicates policies to ensure compliance with regulatory requirements The service catalog may publish information on the channels and options to request changes to Change management will provide service catalog management where change windows are services. published for services. Configuration management: Provides relationship information for mapping services to systems and components Can utilize service models as part of a business impact and risk analysis Benefits from change records to help keep data accurate Uses the service catalog structure as input in the service models within the service component repository Budgeting and costing: Uses the service catalog structure to support service budgeting and costing Publishes service cost and pricing information in the service catalog Leverages service offerings in the service catalog to influence service demand and purchasing behavior Business relationship management (BRM): The service catalog provides BRM with the details published in both the service portfolio and service catalog to engage with partners and customers to establish and improve value delivery The service catalog provides BRM with the information driving strategic engagement and dialog and realization. related to service optimization and alignment to business requirements. BRM provides feedback on the accuracy of the service catalog details. Information security management: Provides a mechanism for communicating security and access prerequisites Information security management provides published details related to policy and risk management.

Chapter 4: Service Catalog Management 65 Service Catalog Management: Enablers Key enablers for the service catalog process across various categories: Tools and technologies: Service catalog software platforms: The service portal: Serves as a centralized digital interface to allow customers and users to interact with the IT service organization; it encompasses incident management, service catalog browsing, and The service catalog: A digital or web-based portal that enables end-users to access comprehensive service The request catalog: Offers a user-focused view of the service catalog to provide detailed information on available services and to facilitate order placement and tracking within a service portal Measurement dashboards: Provides real-time performance metrics against established service levels to The configuration management system (CMS): Stores information on IT resources, their interconnections, and dependencies to enable the accurate mapping of services offered in the catalog Automation and workflow tools: Software facilitating the automated handling of service requests, knowledge management with the catalog being an integral part of this portal information and request specific services to foster a user-friendly experience ensure transparency and accountability approvals, and fulfillment to optimize service delivery processes Resources: Skilled personnel: These are competent professionals proficient in service catalog management that include catalog managers, service owners, and technical specialists. They are pivotal in maintaining and Subject matter experts (SMES): These are experts possessing specialized knowledge across various service domains to ensure the precision and completeness of service descriptions and details. updating the catalog to meet evolving organizational needs. Process documents and templates: Service definition templates: These are standardized templates that outline the structure and necessary information. for each service entry in the catalog. The templates encompass essential components such as service scope, features, dependencies, and associated costs to ensure uniformity and clarity across service Change management procedures: These are well-documented guidelines that define the process for introducing, moditying, or retiring services within the catalog. These procedures ensure governance, By leveraging these enablers, organizations can establish and maintain a robust IT service catalog to foster efficiency, accuracy, and alignment with business objectives throughout the catalog life cycle. descriptions. compliance, and seamless transitions in service offerings.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management Service level management (SLM) is the process of defining, monitoring, and improving the quality of service delivered by IT organizations to their customers. SLM helps align IT services with business objectives, expectations, and needs. It also helps ensure that IT resources are used efficiently and SLM is a tactical process that focuses on defining, agreeing, monitoring, and reporting on the service levels of specific IT services. SLM involves establishing service level agreements (SLAs) with customers, measuring and reporting on the performance of IT services against the SLAS, and initiating service improvement actions when needed. SLM ensures the IT services are delivered in a consistent and reliable Service level management identifies the services and performance targets that provide the critical business context and prioritization required by IT to ensure that its actions reflect the best interest of the stated goals of the business. The gathering of requirements and the establishment of business-facing service agreements drive the development and improvement of the capabilities that support them. In the context of service quality, the capability of service level management has as its focus: effectively and that IT performance is measured and improved continuously. manner and that any issues or deviations are resolved promptly. The establishment of business requirements for service performance The measurement of service delivery against these requirements The reporting of how services are being delivered to the business customer The identification of where improvements need to be made within IT services and/or the IT capabilities and resources that deliver them Service Level Management: Purpose and Objectives Purpose: To ensure the services delivered by the IT organization meet the expectations and needs of the Service level: An important component of any service that includes all elements and the conditions required to support the expected business result; sometimes used internally to mean a service level target Establishing service levels can benefit both parties by clarifying expectations, reducing the risks of misunderstandings or conflicts, and providing a framework for measuring and improving service business stakeholders in a consistent and cost-effective manner quality.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 67 An example of establishing service levels is the one between the IT department and the business for the payroll service. The IT department is responsible for providing and maintaining the payroll system to ensure its security, reliability, and accuracy. The business is responsible for providing the payroll data, complying with the legal and regulatory requirements, and reporting any issues or errors to the IT department. The service levels define the service hours, availability, performance indicators, escalation procedures, and penalties for noncompliance. Key service level management objectives: To agree on measurable, achievable, and end-to-end service level agreements (SLAs) that To align business and IT by establishing a consistent approach to managing and improving the Enabling activities to define, document, agree upon, monitor, measure, report, and review the Reviewing the agreements with internal support teams that underpin the service level agreement Reviewing the existing and proposed vendor contracts to ensure vendor agreements support the Ensuring the IT service provider and the customers have a clear and unambiguous expectation Promoting an effective channel of communication between the IT service provider and the Improving relationships with the business and customer by monitoring and ensuring thatagreed Ensuring that new service level requirements are captured and any new requirements or changes Ensuring that proactive measures to improve the levels of service delivered are implemented Enabling continuous improvement through the measurement, and review of actual performance demonstrate the achievement of business results quality of services level of services provided as well as identifying improvement opportunities service level agreement of the level of service and experience to be delivered customer upon service level targets are met to existing service requirements are managed wherever it is cost justifiable to do SO against service level targets and identifying performance deviations Service level management benefits: By establishing a service level management process, the business or customers of IT can benefit in several ways. For example, they can: Have a clear understanding of the service levels and performance indicators that IT delivers Have a formal mechanism to provide feedback and resolve issues with IT services Have a basis for evaluating the value and return on the investment of IT services Have greater confidence and trust in IT as a strategic partner that supports their business goals

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 68 Service Level Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"? "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy Statement A single approach One service level management approach will be utilized throughout the organization. An example policy could be: "The IT organization will adopt a customer-centric and outcome-based approach for SLM that focuses on delivering value and quality to the customers and stakeholders. The reason for the policy This policy defines the overall strategy and methodology for an SLM such as the scope, objectives, roles, responsibilities, tools, and standards for SLM. Benefits The IT organization will use the IT service management good practices and frameworks for SLM and will align the service levels with the business goals and strategies. Consistency in agreeing to service requirements, agreements, and the subsequent service delivery Improved customer communication, satisfaction, and experience through a single capability Improved management information 7 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy." Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 69 Policy Statement Review cycle The reason for the policy This policy defines the frequency and schedule for reviewing the service levels and the performance of IT services, as well as the criteria and triggers for initiating a Benefits The reviews will cover the achievements, issues, risks, opportunities, and improvement actions for each service. The reviews will consider any changes in the business. Continuous process improvement Make sure the agreements and contracts are fit-for purpose and cost effective over time. Service reviews and reviews of SLAs and supporting contracts will be conducted by the service owner on a regular basis and at least annually. An example policy could be: "The IT organization will conduct regular reviews of the service levels and the performance of IT services on a quarterly basis, or as agreed upon with the customer and stakeholder needs, expectations, or environment that may affect the service levels."" Reporting SLM will produce all reports and coordinate all corresponding reviews to assess the service quality. This will be defined and agreed upon within the SLA. An example policy could be: "The IT organization will produce and distribute service level reports on a monthly basis, or as agreed upon with the customers and stakeholders." review. This policy defines the format, content, frequency, distribution, and ownership of the reports that provide information. on the service levels and performance of IT The service level reports (SLRs) will include relevant metrics, indicators, targets, achievements, deviations, trends, analysis, and recommendations for each service. The SLRs will be owned by the service level manager (SLM) and approved by the service owner (SO) before distribution. There are specific targets to aim for and against which service quality can be measured, monitored, and reported. The IT service provider and customers have a clear and consistent expectation of the level of service and understand the roles and responsibilities. services.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 70 Policy Statement Ownership of services All services will have an assigned service owner to ensure SLAs are managed that include the capture of new or changed requirements and needs from the business. An example policy could be: "The SLM is responsible for coordinating and facilitating the SLM activities and processes such as defining, agreeing upon, monitoring, reporting, and reviewing the service levels of IT services, as well as supporting the IT services according to the agreed-upon service levels.'" The reason for the policy This policy defines the roles and responsibilities of the key stakeholders involved in SLM such as the service level manager, service owner (SO), customer representative (CR), and service provider (SP). Benefits The SO is responsible for ensuring the IT services delivered meet the agreed upon service levels and customer expectations. The CR: is responsible for representing the interests and needs of the customers and stakeholders in relation to the IT services. The SP is responsible for providing a better alignment with business requirements through the whole service life cycle Service improvements that meet business needs and are cost-justifiable Service Level Management: Terms and Definitions expectations related to its functional and nonfunctional requirements service review to support either service provider or customer value objectives Service acceptance criteria: A set of criteria used to validate the IT service meets the customer outcome Service improvement plan (SIP): A temporary or permanent improvement activity resulting from a Service level: A performance measurement of a service characteristic required to support service A service level agreement (SLA): A documented set of expectations between the service provider and customer outlining the agreed-upon responsibilities and performance ofl both parties for a defined service A service level agreement (SLA) between IT and the business for desktop services defines the scope, quality, and availability of the desktop services that IT provides to the business, as well as the roles and provider and/or customer outcome requirements responsibilities of both parties. The desktop service attributes may include: Hardware and software installation, configuration, maintenance, and support for desktop computers, laptops, tablets, printers, scanners, and other peripherals Network connectivity and security for desktop devices Data backup and recovery for desktop devices User account management and access control for desktop devices

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 71 Help desk and technical support for desktop issues The SLA covers the following aspects of the desktop services: Service hours and availability a Service performance and quality Service monitoring and reporting Service escalation and resolution Service review and improvement Patching and maintenance reviewed annually by both parties Period: Example: The SLA is effective from July 1, 2023, to July 19, 2024, and will be Internal support agreements: Agreements with internal support or technical teams that set the An example of an internal support agreement between the service desk and application support: The service desk is responsible for providing first-level support for all incidents and requests related to the applications under the scope of this agreement. The service desk will log, categorize, prioritize, and resolve as many incidents and requests as possible by following the agreed-upon procedures and guidelines. The service desk will also communicate with the users and keep them informed of the status Application support is responsible for providing second-level support for all incidents and requests that cannot be resolved by the service desk. Application support will receive, analyze, diagnose, and resolve complex or technical incidents and requests by following the agreed-upon procedures and guidelines. Application support will also communicate with the service desk and keep them informed of the status responsibilities and performance objectives for the service(s) the team provides and progress of their incidents and requests. and progress of the incidents and requests escalated to them. The performance objectives for both parties: To achieve al high level of user satisfaction with the quality and timeliness of the support provided To resolve at least 80% of the incidents and requests within the agreed-upon service level targets To maintain a high level of collaboration and cooperation between the service desk and Vendor contracts: Legal agreements that obligate the service provider and the vendor to perform certain duties; a companion to the vendor contract is the vendor service level agreement that details the specific application support teams levels of service expected. For example: The cloud service provider agrees to provide the application support team with access toits cloud platform, which includes computing, storage, networking, security, and management services. The application support team agrees to use the cloud platform in accordance with the cloud service provider's policies and guidelines and to pay the fees as per the agreed-upon pricing The cloud service provider guarantees that its cloud platform will meet the performance, availability, reliability, and security standards as defined in the vendor service level agreement model. (SLA), which is a separate document attached to the vendor agreement.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 72 The vendor SLA outlines the specific metrics and targets for each service such as uptime, response time, throughput, backup frequency, recovery time objective, etc. The vendor SLA also specifies The application support team agrees to monitor and report on the service levels of the cloud platform and to notify the cloud service provider of any issues or incidents that may affect the The cloud service provider agrees to respond to and resolve any issues or incidents within the agreed-upon time frames and to communicate with the application support team on the status The vendor agreement is valid for one year from the date of signing and can be renewed or The vendor agreement is governed by the laws of the state of Washington, and any disputes The vendor agreement must support internally established service level agreements by ensuring the cloud service provider delivers the services as per the expectations and requirements of the application support team. The vendor agreement must also align with the business objectives and strategies of both parties and provide a clear framework for managing and measuring the service Service level targets: This: is a commitment that is documented in a service level agreement. Service level targets are based on service level requirements and are needed to ensure the IT service design is fit for purpose. Service level targets should be measurable and achievable and are usually monitored based on Service owner: This is a role responsible for managing one or more services throughout their entire life cycle. Service owners are instrumental in the development of the service strategy, which is a key input Service portfolio: This is the complete set of services that are managed by a service provider in the support of business strategies. The service portfolio is used to manage the entire life cycle of all services the penalties or remedies for any service failures or breaches. quality of service. and progress of the resolution. terminated by the mutual consent of both parties. arising from or related to the vendor agreement will be settled by arbitration. quality and outcomes. key performance indicators (KPIS). to the service portfolio. and includes three stages: 1. Proposed or in development 3. Retired services 2. Published and available in the service catalog (live or available for deployment) Service reporting: Activities that produce and deliver current-state performance levels in comparison to targeted or expected service characteristics and attributes

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 73 Service Level Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events are situations or conditions that initiate the service level management process. Triggering events: New services and service offering requirements A change in business requirements or IT capabilities As service performance issue or incident A periodic service review or audit An agreement renewal or termination Examples of triggering events: New service and service offering requirements: When the business needs a new service or a change in the existing service offerings, the SLAs should be updated to reflect the new Changes in business requirements or IT capabilities: When the business requirements or IT capabilities change due to factors such as market conditions, regulations, technology, or strategy, Service performance issues or incidents: When a service regularly fails to meet the agreed-upon SLAs, or when a major incident occurs that affects the service availability or quality, the SLAs should be reviewed to identify the root cause, implement corrective actions, and prevent Periodic service reviews or audits: When a regular review or audit of the service performance and quality is conducted, the SLAs should be evaluated to ensure they are still relevant, realistic, and Agreement renewals or terminations: When an SLA is due for renewal or termination, the SLAs should be renegotiated or terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of the expectations and capabilities. the SLAs should be revised to align with the current situation and objectives. recurrence. measurable. agreement. Service level management inputs: SLM involves defining, measuring, monitoring, reporting, and improving service levels. To do this effectively, SLM requires various inputs from different sources: Service level management documentation templates Service level requirements Customer reviews Services and service offerings Internal support agreements Vendor contracts Policies Other?

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 74 Service level management documentation templates: These are standardized documents that provide guidance and structure for the SLM process. They include templates for service level agreements (SLAs), service level objectives (SLOS), service level reports, and service improvement plans (SIPs). These templates help to ensure the consistency, clarity, and completeness of the SLM documentation. Service level requirements (SLRS): These are the specifications of the customer's needs and expectations for the service such as availability, reliability, performance, security, and quality. SLRs are usually derived from business requirements, customer feedback, and market analysis. SLRs are used to define Customer reviews: These are the evaluations and feedback from the customers on their satisfaction and perception of the service. Customer reviews can be collected through surveys, interviews, focus groups, or online platforms. Customer reviews help to measure service quality and identify areas for Services and service offerings: These are the descriptions of the services that an organization provides to its customers and stakeholders along with their features, benefits, costs, and terms and conditions. Services and service offerings help to communicate the value proposition and the scope of the service to Internal support agreements (ISAS): These are the agreements between different units or teams within an organization that provide support or resources for the delivery of a service. ISAs define the roles and responsibilities, expectations, and performance measures for the internal support providers. ISAs help Vendor contracts: These are the agreements between an organization and its external vendors or partners that provide goods or services for the delivery of a service. Vendor contracts specify the deliverables, quality standards, timelines, costs, and penalties for the vendor. Vendor contracts help to manage the Policies: These are the rules and guidelines that govern the behavior and actions of an organization and its employees in relation to a service. Policies cover aspects such as ethics, compliance, security, privacy, quality, risk management, change management, incident management, and problem management. the SLOs and SLAs for the service. improvement. the customers and stakeholders. to ensure alignment and collaboration among the internal support providers. risks and performance of the vendor. Policies help to ensure compliance and accountability for the service. Triggering events Inputs New services and service offering requirements Change in business requirements or IT capabilities Service performance issue or incident Periodic service review or audit Agreement renewal ort termination Servicel level management documentation templates Servicel level requirements Customer reviews Services and service offerings Internal support agreements Vendor contracts Policies Other? Figure 8: Service. level management triggering events and inputs

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 75 Service Level Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: An agreed-upon new or updated service scope A completed service review or audit Addressed performance issues or incidents Examples of terminating events: The agreed-upon service scope: This is a terminating event that occurs when the IT service provider and the customer have defined and agreed upon the scope of the service that includes the service level objectives, targets, and measures. This event marks the end of the service level agreement (SLA) negotiation phase and the beginning of the service delivery phase. The output of this event is a signed SLA document that specifies the expectations and responsibilities of both A completed service review: This is a terminating event that occurs when the IT service provider and the customer have conducted a periodic review of the service performance and quality based on the SLA metrics and reports. This event marks the end of a service review cycle and the beginning of a new one. The output of this event is a service review report that summarizes the Addressed performance issues: This is a terminating event that occurs when the IT service provider and the customer have resolved any performance issues or incidents that have affected the service level or customer satisfaction. This event marks the end of a problem management or incident management process and the restoration of normal service operation. The output of this event is a problem or incident record that documents the root cause, impact, resolution, and Outputs of the service level management process include agreed-upon service level requirements and targets, service level agreements, updated vendor contracts, service measurement, and service parties. achievements, issues, and improvement actions for the service. lessons learned for the issue. improvement areas. Service level management outputs: Agreed-upon service level requirements and targets Service level agreements Updated vendor contracts Service measurement Service improvement areas Agreed-upon service level requirements and targets: These are the specific and measurable criteria that define the expected quality and performance of the service such as availability, reliability, responsiveness, etc. They are negotiated and agreed upon by the service provider and the customer and documented in the service level agreement (SLA).

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 76 Service level agreements: These are the formal contracts that specify the terms and conditions of the service delivery that includes the roles and responsibilities ofl both parties, the service level requirements and targets, the reporting and monitoring mechanisms, the escalation procedures, and the remedies for noncompliance. They are signed by the service provider and the customer and are reviewed and updated Updated vendor contracts: These are the revised agreements that reflect any changes in the service level requirements and targets or in the scope or nature of the service delivery. They are: negotiated and agreed upon by the service provider and the vendor and documented in the vendor contract. They are aligned with the SLA and ensure the vendor meets the expectations of the service provider and the customer. Service measurement: This is the process of collecting, analyzing, and reporting data on the actual performance and quality of the service as compared to the service level requirements and targets. It involves using various tools and methods such as metrics, indicators, surveys, audits, etc. It helps to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the service delivery, identify any gaps or issues, and provide Service improvement areas: These are the aspects of service delivery that need to be enhanced or modified to meet or exceed the service level requirements and targets. They are identified based on the results of the service measurement, as well as on feedback from the customers, users, stakeholders, etc. They are prioritized and addressed by implementing appropriate actions such as corrective measures, periodically. feedback for improvement. preventive actions, improvement initiatives, etc. Terminating event Outputs An agreed-upon new or updated service scope Ad completed service review or audit Addressed performance issues or incidents Agreed-upon service level requirements and targets Servicel level agreements Updated vendor contracts Servicer measurement Servicel improvement areas Figure 9: Service level management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 77 Service Level Management: Themes and Activities Service level management involves planning around three themes including: Business needs and expectations aligned with IT capabilities Establishing communication channels for service reporting Service review and improvement Business needs and expectations aligned with IT capabilities: This theme involves defining, documenting, agreeing upon, and maintaining a set of service level agreements that specify the service requirements, targets, responsibilities, and guarantees for each IT service. It also involves identifying and managing the service level requirements of current and future customers, as well as the service Establishing communication channels for service reporting: This theme involves collecting, measuring, analyzing, and reporting on the service performance and achievements against the SLAS, as well as the customer satisfaction and feedback. It also involves communicating the service reports to the relevant stakeholders such as customers, users, service providers, and senior management, as well as ensuring Service review and improvement: This theme involves conducting regular service reviews with the customers and other stakeholders to evaluate the service performance, quality, value, and satisfaction, as well as identifying and agreeing on the service improvement opportunities and improvement actions. It also involves monitoring and reviewing the progress and outcomes of the improvement actions in improvement opportunities that can enhance the value and quality of the IT services. they are aware of the service achievements, issues, risks, and improvement plans. addition to updating the SLAs and service improvement opportunities accordingly. Common SLM process activities: Define the service level objectives and targets. Negotiate and agree upon the service level agreements with the customers. Monitor and report on the service level performance and compliance. Review and improve the service level agreements and processes. Conduct service reviews. Manage the service level risks and issues.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 78 The following table represents a high-level set of activities for service level management: Activity expectations aligned with IT capabilities: Define service level objectives and targets. Description Business needs and For new or changed services, service level management works with the service owner and customers to determine and document the service level objectives around service quality expectations such as availability, capacity, When designing services, determining service level objectives is one of the earliest activities. Customers should be involved from the outset in developing and agreeing to the initial targets. This is a difficult but critical activity because the targets established by facilitating discussion with customers and all the other capabilities will be used throughout the life cycle to fund, build, transition, operate, and improve the service. performance, service continuity, and security. Business needs and Service level management supports IT service owners by ensuring that expectations aligned with IT capabilities: Negotiate and agree upon the service level agreements with the customers. service level agreements (SLAs) between the IT service provider and the customer are negotiated and agreed upon. Once established, they need to be reviewed for new or changed services to ensure they are still viable for any Nothing should be included in an SLA unless it can be effectively monitored and measured using commonly agreed-upon data points. Intelligent monitoring must be established at the end-to-end service level to match the customer's perception of the service and to provide critical insights into the This activity formulates, agrees upon, and maintains an appropriate service level management structure for the organization, including: A service level agreement structure (e.g-, service-based, customer-based, or multilevel-based on service offerings/options) Ensuring that supporting internal agreements are established within the An alignment between service level agreements and vendor contract management relationships with targets established through service level Note: Vendor contracts are established through the vendor management process with input from service level management. These contracts must also be reviewed periodically and whenever new or changed services require alterations to the agreed-upon service levels to ensure the contracts underpin additional objectives. overall health of the service. IT provider management the providers'SLAs.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 79 Activity Establishing communication channels for service reporting: Monitor and report on service levels. Description Service level management will aggregate service quality data from various sources such as incident, availability, performance, and IT security as well as both the customer and user experience with the service. The SLM will monitor and perform analysis in comparison to service level agreements. SLM will identify if service levels were achieved, breached, or threatened SLM in conjunction with service owners, business relationship management, and/or continuous improvement will determine if a service improvement Service reports are provided to service owners and/or customers according to the reporting mechanisms, intervals, and report formats that are defined and Anomaly reports that indicate when an SLA could be or has been breached should be developed to complement the weekly/monthly operational reports. Such reports are typically in the form of charts with red/amber/green status At times, the customer may request ad hoc reports, and there should be an agreed-upon method of evaluating and fulfilling such requests because there (put at: risk). plan needs to be implemented. Establishing communication channels for service reporting: Produce service reports. agreed upon in the SLA. indicators. may be additional costs, time, and resources required. agreed upon and documented in the SLA. Service review and The frequency, agenda, and format of service review meetings should be improvement: Conduct service reviews. Internal service reviews are undertaken within the provider organization. These should be conducted by service owners, process owners, vendor managers, and functional group managers. These should be held monthly/quarterly depending on the rate of change and the stability of the Internal service reviews should assess any weak areas where targets are not being met. All internal service reviews should be documented with meeting minutes and action-item lists that are tracked for status and clear service. accountabilities for completion. External service reviews are done outside of the provider organization with the service customer. This review is typically facilitated by business relationship management (when this process exists) and may also involve The output of a service review meeting can lead to creating a service service owners and/or SLM staff. improvement plan.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 80 Activity improvement: Review and improve service level agreements and processes. Description Service review and This is an activity of continuous improvement for service level management focused on evaluating and enhancing the existing SLAs and processes. It involves an ongoing assessment and refinement of the standards, targets, and workflows established for delivering services to clients or customers. 1. The evaluation of SLAs: Assessing the current service level agreements in place and examining their effectiveness, relevance, and alignment with 2. Defining and documenting the SLA's process analysis: Reviewing the SLM procedures and workflows associated with meeting these SLAs; this involves identifying bottlenecks, inefficiencies, or areas for enhancement 3. Identifying gaps: Identifying areas where the current SLAs or processes may fall short in meeting customer expectations or business objectives 4. Proposing improvements: Developing recommendations and improvements to enhance existing SLAs, which can involve clarifying metrics, adjusting response times, updating policies, or implementing 5. Implementing and communicating improvements: Implementing improvements and ensuring that all stakeholders (internal teams, clients, etc.) are informed and aligned with the revised SLAs and processes risks and issues related to service level management that could impact the Activities may include: business goals new technologies or tools Service review and Involves the proactive identification, assessment, and mitigation of potential improvement: Manage the service level risks and issues. delivery of agreed-upon service levels. This activity focuses on: Risk identification: Identifying and understanding potential threats or uncertainties that could affect service levels such as technological failures, resource constraints, vendor issues, or external factors Risk assessment: Evaluating the likelihood and potential impact of these risks on service delivery and considering their severity and the extent to Issue identification: Addressing ongoing or emergent issues that impact service levels such as incidents and longer-term problems which they could disrupt or degrade services

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 81 Service Level Management: Actors and Roles The process involves various actors who have different roles and responsibilities in relation to the Customer(s): This is a customer, a group, or organization that receives and uses the IT services and pays for them or has a formal agreement with the service provider. The customer organization defines their needs and expectations for the IT services and provides feedback on their satisfaction and perception of Customer representative(s) (CR): Thisi is a designated point of contact who has the authority to represent and speak on behalf of the customer organization. The customer representative establishes service requirements, participates in the negotiation and agreement of service level targets and requirements, and escalates issues or complaints when necessary. The CR may also participate in providing feedback The vendor relationship manager: The vendor manager is the person who is responsible for managing the relationship with vendors who provide IT services or components to the service provider. The vendor manager ensures the vendors deliver the agreed-upon level of quality and performance and comply with the contractual obligations and service level agreements. The vendor manager also coordinates and communicates with the vendors on issues, changes, incidents, or requests related to their services or The service owner: The service owner is the person who is accountable for the delivery and management of a specific IT service or a group of related services. The service owner acts as a single point of contact for the customers and stakeholders of the service and represents their interests and needs. The service owner also coordinates with other service owners, process owners, and functional managers to ensure the service meets the agreed-upon service level targets and requirements and supports the business Service level manager(s): The service level manager is the person who is responsible for ensuring all IT services are delivered in accordance with the agreed-upon service level targets and requirements. The service level manager facilitates the negotiation and agreement of service level agreements (SLAs) with the customers and monitors and reports on the compliance and performance of the IT services against the SLAs. The service level manager also identifies and manages risks, issues, or improvement The service level management process is a crucial part of ensuring the business and IT align their goals and expectations. The key customers of this process are the ones who benefit from the delivery of high process. Following is a brief description of each actor: value. on product and service design outcomes deriving from sprints or projects. products. objectives. opportunities related to the service level management process or IT services. quality IT services that meet their needs and requirements. There are various types of key customers: The business stakeholders are the owners and sponsors of the business processes that depend on IT services. They define the business objectives, priorities, and expectations for the IT services, and they monitor and evaluate the performance and value of the IT services.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 82 The IT service providers are the internal or external organizations that design, develop, operate, and support the IT services. They negotiate and agree upon the service level agreements (SLAs) with the business stakeholders, and they ensure the IT services are delivered according to the SLAs. They also report and communicate on the service level achievements and improvement The IT service users are the end users of the IT services. They consume and interact with the IT services on a daily basis, and they provide feedback and suggestions for improvement. They also initiatives. escalate any issues or complaints that affect their satisfaction or productivity. All the capabilities encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this capability include: In addition to the generic manager role, the service level manager also has key responsibilities to: The service level manager Ensure all reports and dashboards provide a holistic view of service performance rather than a Ensure internal and external service review meetings are regularly carried out and may also Ensure improvement initiatives identified in service reviews are acted upon and progress reports Ensure all changes are assessed for their impact on service levels, including SLAs and vendor Ensure breaches of SLA targets are highlighted and investigated and that follow-up actions are Ensure internal service review meetings are regularly carried out and may also facilitate such Ensure external service performance review meetings are regularly carried out with service purely technical view facilitate some meetings are provided to customers Ensure service reports are produced for each customer service contracts taken to prevent their recurrence meetings customers

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 83 The service owner Service ownershipis as critical to service management as establishing ownership for the capabilities. The service owner role is a single point of accountability for a specific service within an organization. Responsibilities of this role include: Continuous improvement and the management of change affecting the service under their care Being a primary stakeholder in all the IT capabilities and processes that enable or support the service; for example: Incident management: Problem management: Involved in or perhaps chairs the major incident team for high priority incidents Plays a major role in establishing the root cause and suggested permanent fixes for Is a key stakeholder in determining whether a new release affecting a service is Participates in assessing and approving normal changes to the services they own Ensures all groups that maintain the data and relationships for the service architecture they are responsible for have done SO with the level of integrity the service being evaluated Release and deployment management: production ready Change management: a Configuration management: required Service catalog management: Availability and capacity: a IT service continuity: Ensures the catalog is accurate in relationship to their service Reviews technical data from a domain perspective to ensure the needs of the Understands and is responsible for ensuring all elements required to restore their Assists in defining and tracking the cost models in relationship to how their service overall service are being met service are known and in place in the event of a crisis IT financial management: is costed and recovered

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 84 Service Level Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: The service delivery is compliant with SLAs and supporting agreements. KPIs: The percentage of service targets being met by support groups: The number of service targets by support group per activity being met The number of service targets by support group per activity being missed The percentage of feedback provided to service level management to support the creation of SLAs: The target time frame to provide feedback The time to submit feedback by stakeholder group CSF: Manage the delivery and quality of all live IT services. KPIs: The percentage reduction in the number and severity of SLA targets threatened or The percentage improvement in customer satisfaction and experience scores for services missed CSF: Support a close relationship between the IT service provider and business customers. KPIs: An increase in the percentage of SLA reviews completed on time The percentage improvement in customer satisfaction and experience scores for services: a Note this KPI supports multiple CSFs CSF: Manage the effectiveness and efficiency of the SLM capability. KPIS: An increased percentage of services covered by SLAs An increased percentage of the number of internal support agreements and vendor contracts that are in place

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 85 Service Level Management: Integrations SLM interacts with several other IT service management processes such as vendor management, business relationship management, request management, and incident management. The following examples describe the process integrations needed between SLM and these processes: Vendor management is the process of managing the contracts and relationships with external providers of IT services or components. SLM and vendor management need to coordinate and align their activities to ensure the SLAs with customers are consistent and compatible with the vendor contracts. SLM provides input to vendor management on the service requirements, performance indicators, and improvement plans for vendor contracts. Vendor management provides feedback to SLM on vendor performance, issues, and risks that may affect the SLAs. Business relationship management (BRM) is the process of establishing and maintaining a good rapport and communication with customers and stakeholders. SLM and BRM need to collaborate and communicate effectively to understand customer needs, expectations, and satisfaction levels. SLM supports BRM by providing information on the current and future IT service portfolio, SLAs, service level reports, and improvement initiatives. BRM supports SLM by providing feedback on customer perception, preferences, and complaints regarding IT services. Request management is the process ofl handling the requests for access, information, change, or support from users or customers. SLM and request management need to work together to ensure the requests are processed in accordance with the SLAs. SLM defines the service targets, priorities, and escalation procedures for request management. Request management reports to Incident management is the process of restoring normal service operation as quickly as possible after an interruption or degradation of IT services. SLM and incident management need to coordinate and align their actions to minimize the impact of incidents on the SLAs. SLM defines the service targets, priorities, and escalation procedures for incident management. Incident management reports to SLM on the incident resolution performance, metrics, and trends. Service catalog management: This process maintains a catalog of all IT services that are offered by the service provider and provides information on their features, benefits, costs, availability, and performance. This process helps to communicate the value proposition of IT services to the SLM on the request fulfillment performance, metrics, and trends. customers and supports the negotiation and agreement of SLAs.

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 86 Service Level Management: Enablers Enablers are essential components of any business process because they help to optimize the performance and outcomes of the process. In the context of IT service level management, enablers can be classified into three main categories: tools and technology, resources, and process documentation. Tools and technology are the software and hardware that support the service level management process such as service level agreement (SLA) templates, monitoring and reporting tools, service catalogs, and service desk systems. These tools and technology help to define, measure, report, and improve the service For example, a monitoring tool can help to track the availability and performance of a service and alert the service provider if there is a deviation from the agreed SLA. A service catalog can help to communicate the service offerings and expectations to the customers and users and facilitate the levels delivered to the customers and users. negotiation and agreement of SLAs. Some key ITSM solution automation requirements to support the process include: Integration with a published and available service catalog to facilitate finding the most relevant Advanced analytical tools to process and analyze data from multiple sources that include capability records and information as well as survey results and feedback (e.g to identify Service level dashboards that are configurable to suit service owners, customers, and other service Survey tools to gather feedback and measure satisfaction and experience levels from stakeholders An ability to share service quality data with users and customers in an agreed-upon format via a report/dashboard; for example, using a secure website showing SLA performance results Automation of documentation or content management to support tracking the status of SLM Integration with document control tools (e.g, control of expiry dates, version control, archiving, services and service levels patterns, outliers, improvement areas, etc.) stakeholders needs documents (e.g., draft, live, reviewed, etc.) etc.) Automated reminders to review SLAs before they expire Monitoring and event management tools (e.g-, to receive timely and actionable alerts, to collect Reporting templates to measure and provide interval-based reports (e.g-, monthly/quarterly) and event-based reports (e.g., service outages and significant events) on service achievements system and service health data)

Chapter 5: Service Level Management 87 Resources are the people and budgets that are allocated to the service level management process such as service level managers, service owners, account managers, and service analysts. These resources help to plan, execute, control, and improve the service level management process by performing activities such as defining SLAs, monitoring service levels, reporting on service performance, resolving service issues, reviewing SLAS, and initiating service improvement actions. For example, a service level manager can help to coordinate the SLA negotiation and review process with the customers and users and ensure the Process documentation is the set of documents that describes the purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, activities, inputs, outputs, metrics, and procedures of the service level management process. These documents help to standardize and streamline the service level management process by providing guidance, instructions, templates, examples, and best practices for the process execution. For example, a process document can help to define the steps and criteria for SLA negotiation and review and provide SLAs are. aligned with the business needs and objectives. a template for SLA creation. Other potential enablers of service level management: Governance: This is the set of policies, standards, roles, responsibilities, authorities, and accountabilities that define how the service level management process is designed, implemented, monitored, reviewed, and improved. Governance helps to ensure the service level management process is aligned with the organizational strategy and objectives, complies with the regulatory Culture: This is the set of values, beliefs, attitudes, behaviors, and norms that shape how the people involved in the service level management process interact with each other and with the customers and users. Culture helps to foster a collaborative and customer-oriented mindset among the service providers and consumers, promotes a culture of continuous improvement and innovation in service delivery, and encourages feedback and learning from experience. Communication: This is the set of methods, channels, formats, frequencies, and audiences that are used to exchange information related to the service level management process. Communication helps to ensure all the relevant parties are aware of the service level expectations and performance results; that any issues or deviations are reported and resolved in a timely manner; that any changes or improvements are communicated and agreed upon; and that any requirements and industry standards, and delivers value to the stakeholders. feedback or suggestions are solicited and considered.

Chapter 6: Incident Management Incident management is the process responsible for managing the life cycle of all incidents irrespective of their origination. This process coordinates service restoration efforts across support levels as well as both the internal and external stakeholders involved in service delivery. The incident management process identifies, records, and analyzes all incidents within the scope of IT service expectations. Incident: An incident is defined as an unintended event that disturbs or could disturb normal operations. Incidents may affect one or more expected aspects of a service such as availability, function, security, For example, in IT, an incident could be a server outage, a cyberattack, a data breach, or a software bug. Outside of IT, an incident could be a fire, a power failure, a natural disaster, or a human error. Incidents can have negative impacts on the performance, quality, safety, or reputation of an organization or its stakeholders. Therefore, it is important to identify, report, and resolve incidents as quickly and effectively delivery, and performance, etc. as possible. Incident Management: Purpose and Objectives The purpose of incident management: To minimize the disruption of business activities by restoring Incident management is a vital process that ensures the continuity and quality of IT services. It aims to reduce the impact of incidents on business operations by restoring normal service as soon as possible. It also involves identifying and preventing potential incidents and, in addition, communicating and managing expectations with the business stakeholders. Incident management aligns IT and the business by) providing consistent and reliable service delivery. A mature incident management practice can benefit the organization in many ways such as improving customer satisfaction, reducing costs, enhancing Incident management is a critical component of an IT service management road map because it directly affects customer satisfaction, trust, and loyalty. By prioritizing incident management, an IT service provider can demonstrate its commitment to deliver high-quality services, resolve issues effectively and service(s) as quickly as possible reputation, and increasing efficiency. efficiently, and ensure continuous improvement.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 89 There are many objectives for incident management. Examples include: Developing an awareness of and enabling the prevention of incidents Enabling transparency and expectation management Enabling a rapid service restoration. through prioritized resolution efforts management, problem, and monitoring and alerting information Ensuring agreed-upon levels of service quality are maintained Achieving efficiency by using information from other processes such as configuration Making it easy for users to report incidents and enable a frictionless incident resolution Enabling a consistent and appropriate communication related to service restoration Aligning service restoration activities and priorities with those of the business experience Additional examples include: Providing a structured approach to incident management Effectively using a knowledge management system Maintaining user satisfaction with the quality of IT services Ensuring standardized methods and procedures are used for an efficient and prompt response, Providing and training users for self-help capabilities to optimize the efficiency and effectiveness of the process; this is done by shifting simple incident resolution activity to the users with a just analysis, documentation, ongoing management, and reporting of incidents in-time approach, thus freeing up time within incident management

Chapter 6: Incident Management 90 Incident Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"* "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy Statement Prioritization The reason for the policy This policy area defines how to assign a level of urgency and impact to each incident based on predefined criteria and categories. The prioritization helps to allocate resources and determine the response time for resolving the incident. The priority level Is determined by the severity of the incident, the number of affected users or systems, and the potential business impact. The priority level can be changed during the incident life cycle, based on new information or escalation. Benefits Business critical incidents are more quickly identified. The speed and resources needed to solve an incident are assessed. All incidents will be prioritized based on impact and urgency as defined in the priority model that has been created for incident, problem, and change management. Example: All incidents must be classified into one of four priority levels: P1 (critical), P2 (high), P3 (medium), or P4 (low). 8 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy." Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Documentation 91 The reason for the policy This policy area specifies the format, content, and quality of the information that must be recorded for each incident. The documentation standards ensure the incident details are clear, accurate, and consistent and that they can be used for analysis and reporting purposes. Benefits Accurate and up-to-date information to provide to Incidents can be assessed for potential service breaches and the need for management escalation. Accurate data to support problem detection and root cause analysis All work and progress toward incident resolution, regardless of the support level or staff member, will be clearly documented in the support channel on an ongoing and timely basis and (by the close of the incident) be fully documented in the incident tracking tool for the complete incident history. An example policy for documentation standards is: All incidents must be logged in the incident management system, using the standard incident template. The incident template includes fields such as incident ID, priority, status, category, description, resolution, root cause, etc. The incident record must be updated whenever there is a change in the incident status or information. users

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Status tracking The status of incidents will be provided or made available to customers throughout the life cycle of the incident through resolution and recovery. An example policy for status have a current status that reflects the stage of the incident life cycle: new; assigned; in progress; resolved; closed; etc. The status must be updated whenever there is a change in the incident stage or ownership. The status of all active incidents must be reported daily to the incident manager and relevant stakeholders. 92 The reason for the policy This policy area outlines how to monitor and report the progress and status of each incident from initiation to closure. The status tracking helps to keep track of the incident life cycle, identify bottlenecks or delays, and stakeholders. Benefits Increases customer satisfaction Reduces the volume of incoming follow-up calls to the service desk tracking is: All incidents must communicate with

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Record accountability All incidents must have a clear owner who is held accountable for the incident within the SLA and other targets. responsibility of the individuals and groups involved in the resolution of the incident. An example policy for record accountability is: All incidents must have an assigned owner who is responsible for managing and resolving the incident. The owner can be a person or a team, depending on the type and complexity of the incident. The owner can delegate tasks or escalate issues to other parties as needed but remains accountable for the overall outcome of the incident. 93 The reason for the policy This policy area defines who is responsible and accountable for each incident record from creation to closure. The record accountability helps to assign roles and responsibilities, accountability, and facilitates collaboration and escalation. Benefits Ensures all incidents receive appropriate and timely support regardless of which functional is working on it, as defined in internal support agreements Improves the ability to resolve all incidents within agreed-upon service levels group All resolving activities are the ensures ownership and

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Communication Communication will be provided to IT and its customers concerning any known or expected degradation of service and impacts on service providers and/or their customers. An example policy for communication is: All incidents must have a communication plan that defines the frequency, mode, audience, and content of communication. The communication plan must be aligned with the priority level and impact of the incident. It must include both proactive and reactive communication methods such as email notifications, phone calls, web updates, press releases, surveys, etc. Incident management will an incident that will be common and utilized throughout IT and other processes. 94 The reason for the policy This policy area describes how to communicate with internal and external parties during and after an incident. The communication helps to inform and update stakeholders, manage expectations and perceptions, and provide feedback and lessons learned. Benefits Customer expectations will be set accurately. Reduces the calls for updates, since customers know what is happening Increases customer satisfaction and the perception of the IT service provider image Easier for support personnel to associate calls with known issues and problems To ensure consistency in the Provides a clear understanding of an incident Provides the ability to distinguish incidents from other types of work provide a single definition of management of incidents

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Escalation 95 The reason for the policy To ensure that incidents are resolved in accordance with the requirements of the company and that service levels are maintained Benefits A timely closure of incidents Increases customer satisfaction Increases IT staff's understanding of roles and responsibilities and, therefore, their effectiveness Ensures that appropriate levels of management are notified of the incident and its status Improves the recording of pertinent management information Increases customer satisfaction and a feeling of empowerment Reduces the volume of incoming follow-up calls Ensures that recurring incidents are reopened and resolved to the customer's satisfaction Identifies the service provider performance for end-to-end incident resolution Identifies any issues with supporting internal agreements or vendor contracts Provides trend analysis for the incident management process and incident handling Identifies opportunities for improvement Incident management will provide an escalation policy in accordance with business needs to ensure incidents are dealt with in a timely manner. Incident closure To ensure all incident solutions or workarounds are agreed upon with business needs and satisfy service level agreements Incident closure is the result of the customer validating that the resolution to the incident has been met and the service has been restored to the customer's satisfaction. Reporting To assess the performance measures (e.g., efficiency and effectiveness) of the incident management process Incident management metrics and management reports will be provided to management, staff, and customers in accordance with outlined procedures and agreements.

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Reviews 96 The reason for the policy To: maximize process benefits and reduce costs Benefits Identifies opportunities for process, tool, and staff improvements Identifies opportunities for staff training on processes and tools Reduces constraints that are a result of inadequate resources Reviews are conducted by the process owner regularly at the process owner's discretion. Reviews will focus on continuous improvement of the process as a whole, as well as consistency, repeatability, and the expected achievement of key performance indicators (KPIS). Consistency One incident management approach based on the ITSM model will be utilized throughout the organization. To ensure the consistent and quality management of incidents from detection through resolution and closure Consistency in managing incidents for all users Consistency in policies and procedures when incidents are escalated The faster restoration of services The faster resolution of incidents Improved customer communication and satisfaction Improved management information Reduces confusion regarding using the appropriate policies and procedures for resolving incidents Appropriate reporting against service level agreements (SLAs) for incident resolution separate from service requests Routing requests Service requests identified through the incident management capability will be referred to the request management capability. To ensure incidents are handled using incident policies, models, and service levels that are separate and different from as service request

Chapter 6: Incident Management Policy Statement Service desk The 97 The reason for the policy To ensure all incidents are consistently and effectively managed via integrated and authorized support channels connected to a central process Benefits Enables the application of a centralized data for incidents Enables a consistent entry point for the initiation of process activities repository service desk will be the first point of contact for users. Example detailed policies The following areas, such as categorization, classification, and prioritization, are critical success factors for incident management and are used in other IT service management process areas as well. These include problem management, change management, release and deployment management, knowledge management, and request management. For this reason, an integrated approach across capabilities is appropriate. The categorization model The main objective of categorization is to formally identify and group process records and service components by type or by a similar group to support process activities such as assignment and support While discussing best practices around categorization, it should be noted there are at least three different types of categorizations that are associated with different activities. These types of categorizations are reporting, and to determine appropriate responses. explained using the incident management process as an example: 1. Initial record categorization: This first classification occurs at the beginning of the life cycle of an incident. It captures important information that determines how to manage the incident: The association with services The default priority and escalation characteristics It helps to define what questions should be asked or what information should be checked such as identifying a relationship to match against known issues, other incidents, and knowledge articles. Normal incident Major incident Initial categorization classifies the type of incident, such as a:

Chapter 6: Incident Management 98 Security incident: Security incidents often follow a separate process and/or a separate set of procedures with involvement from a limited subset of leadership and SME resources on a need-to-know basis that depends on the impact of the breach to the organization and the security policies that need to be invoked. 2. Service component categorization: A second form of categorization occurs when the incident record is categorized with respect to This second state of categorization will determine which stakeholders should be engaged for which part of the organization's technology and/or services are impacted. service restoration and will be critical for incident management reporting. 3. Closure categorization: A third level of categorization occurs at the end of the incident life cycle to help determine a At the end of the incident life cycle, the closure categorization supports the goals of problem management by providing an initial insight into the source or a reason for the incident. The closure categorization allows for the capture of cause codes and the association. of an incident to other service management records such as technology failure, human error, third-party, or a primary reporting matrix for management information. process error. Categorization scope: Three processes in particular (but not limited to these) require a grouping of like records  incident Under a service management model, these processes are dependent on each other for input: management, problem management, and change management. Incident records are associated with problem records, which in turn are associated with change records. Each of these three processes may use a categorization tree for slightly different objectives, but it is a best practice to use a common coding system for each process. Additionally: The service desk applies the categorization model to record and initially classify an incident. In this initial categorization, the service desk also refers to the configuration management service Problem management conducts trending on the incident recording database to identify potential Change management requires accurate incident categorization to identify incidents arising from Service level management uses incident data to measure the deviation of the service availability This categorization system will provide the best possible integration of process data and provide component repository to associate the incident with a service component. problems and perform proactive problem management. changes to the environment. from service level agreements. consistent, accurate, and meaningful management information.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 99 To facilitate the integration of process records, the automation of the process workflow, and the effectiveness of reporting, adequate time must be spent upfront on the development of a mature and The areas of process automation that rely on the categorization coding system include the following: business-relevant categorization system. An automated record escalation Escalation and notification rules Priority (impact and urgency) population Automated record population Incident correlation to problems Ai reporting and trend analysis Knowledge management information. and support scripts The automated execution of incident playbooks and runbooks To automate some of the activities of incident management, several tools can be used in the resolution of incidents aligned with common categorization structures: Call scripting: Knowledge base: Incident correlation: a Tools that provide a script or set of questions to aid an incident management analyst in providing resolution advice are based on a category. information that is classified by category. Incident management tools provide access to internal and external knowledge a Automation facilitates a comparison or search against like or common incidents to determine the resolution advice for either incident management analysts or users themselves. The prioritization model Priority: This is a categorization structure used to identify the relative importance of an incident, problem, or change. The priority is primarily determined by a combination of impact and urgency but may also be influenced by risk, resource availability, and the effort required. The priority typically identifies the required times for actions to be taken. Impact/severity: A measurement of the degree of actual or potential service failure that impacts business processes and expected service outcomes Urgency: A scale of time sensitivity based on the impacted business processes and expected service outcomes:

Chapter 6: Incident Management 100 For example, a high-impact incident may have low urgency if the impact will not affect the business until the end of the financial year. Resource availability: Expected efforts: The resources available for coping in the meantime and for correcting the fault The efforts involved in resolving or completing a task To manage incidents, problems, changes, and other process work, organizations must be able to assign A higher priority entails escalation and notification to higher levels within the organization. This implies that a low-priority incident, problem, or change generally should not be re-prioritized just to expedite its In resource-constrained environments, it may also mean that planned activities such as project-related activities may be delayed. Care must be taken to ensure all work is prioritized in a way that supports the Ideally, service level management is engaged when defining the impact and urgency through negotiated The priority is influenced by the risk and resource availability but is primarily determined by a combination of impact and urgency. It is very important to consider the implications of assigning various a priority to every record opened. resolution. organization's strategies and goals. service level agreements (SLAS). priority levels to an incident, problem, or change record. Additional descriptions of impact: Impact is a measure of the scope or degree of failure to business goals caused by an incident or problem (for example) that is equal to the extent to which agreed-upon service level agreements The number of systems or users affected measures the scope of the service degradation. (SLA) can be degraded. Generally, the impact is differentiated by the relative scope such as: a High: Department, floor, branch, or line of business (LOB) Medium: A small group of users Low: Single user However, the impact can also be altered by: directors) A VIP status, which is based on organizational hierarchy (e.g, executives, VPs, managing Particular user needs (i.e., specific users who justify immediate or special attention based on their direct correlation to the organizational mission (e.g-, surgeons, financial traders, In the case of users with a VIP status, the impact should be considered differently. For partners in a law firm) example: High: A group of users with VIP status Medium: A single user with VIP status

Chapter 6: Incident Management Additional descriptions for urgency: 101 Since a high-impact incident does not by default have to be solved immediately, it is not Urgency provides a second measure of business criticality, which indicates the necessary speed Whereas the impact is defined by scope, the urgency is defined by the time sensitivity: a It is determined by the criticality of a resolution as measured in the mission or by the By comparison, for the same period of downtime, a core business service will cost the business more than a support service. The. Agile community will often refer to this concept a High: A core business service  an activity that has a direct financial impact on the Medium: A support service an activity that directly supports the execution of a core Low: A non-urgent service  an activity that supports a core business service but is not necessarily a high-priority incident. of resolving an incident of a certain impact. financial impact of a particular service's downtime. as the'cost of delay." Urgency examples include: business organization (e.g. core applications) business service (e.g printing services) time sensitive (e.g, Word, Excel) Additional descriptions for expected efforts: The priority and urgency alone do not necessarily determine the order in which an incident, problem, or change is completed. It is possible to have a very low-priority incident, problem, or change addressed before higher-prioritized ones due to the relative ease of the resolution and implementation. For example: Resetting a password (network or phone): A password reset, which is an activity with a low impact and an average urgency, can be resolved with minimal effort; therefore, it may be addressed immediately if circumstances warrant. Escalation Escalation is an activity that includes the involvement of additional resources to respond to a service outage for which additional stakeholder engagement is required for a successful service restoration. Two example types of escalation may include subject matter escalation (lateral across groups) and management escalation (to escalate up to a higher authority). Hierarchic escalation: Functional escalation: Informing or engaging a higher authority to enable resource allocation and decision-making Engaging peer or vendor stakeholder groups for access to their subject matter knowledge or domain access and expertise

Chapter 6: Incident Management 102 Incident Management: Terms and Definitions Common terms and vocabulary may have disparate meanings for different organizations, disciplines, or individuals. It is essential, early in a process implementation, to agree upon the common usage of terms. It is recommended where possible not to diverge from a best practice unless necessary because many other customers and vendors may also be using the same terms if they are following the best practice process frameworks. This brings unity in the areas of communication to help enhance not only internal dialog but also documentation, instructions, presentations, reports, and interaction with other external Event: An IT event is an occurrence that requires attention; IT events can include job completions, hardware failures, software errors, security breaches, and other issues that are related to or impacted the bodies. performance or availability of IT systems. Typical events may include: Informational: For logging and nonrepudiation requirements Warning: Identifying a potential threshold breach Anomaly: Events that identify a breach of expected service performance Incident types security, and major. The incident management process will be involved in addressing three main types of incidents  normal, A normal incident: These are disruptions or errors that affect a small number of users or services and can be resolved with minimal impact. A normal incident can be resolved by following the standard incident management process, which involves logging, categorizing, prioritizing, assigning, A security incident: These are unauthorized or malicious actions that compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of data or systems. A security incident may be caused by internal or external attacks, human errors, or system failures. A security incident requires a more rigorous and specialized response than a normal incident because it may have legal, regulatory, or reputational implications. A security incident may involve the security management process that coordinates the identification, analysis, containment, eradication, recovery, and communication of security incidents. A majori incident: These are critical disruptions or failures that affect many users or services and require an urgent and coordinated response. A major incident may affect multiple services, customers, or locations. A major incident requires a more urgent and escalated response than al normal incident because it may cause significant disruption, damage, or loss. A major incident may involve the major incident management process that mobilizes additional resources, establishes a command structure, implements a communication plan, and coordinates the resolution and recovery of major incidents. investigating, resolving, and closing the incident.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 103 Figure 10: Incident types Communication Resource coordination Implementing corrective actions Review Normal service Normal These are disruptions or errors that affect a small number of users or services and can be resolved with minimal impact. Security These are unauthorized or malicious actions that compromise. the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of data or systems. Major These are critical disruptions or failures that affect many users or services and require an urgent and coordinated response. operation: The service operation defined within the service level agreement (SLA) targets Response and resolution time Response time and resolution time are two key metrics that support the incident management process. Response time is the time it takes for IT to acknowledge and start working on an incident, while resolution time is the time it takes to restore the service to normal operation. These metrics help to measure the efficiency and effectiveness of the incident management process, as well as the customer satisfaction and business impact of incidents. Example: An IT example of response time and resolution time is when a server crashes and causes a disruption to a critical application. The response time is the time between when the server crash is detected and when the IT team begins to troubleshoot the incident. The resolution time is the

Chapter 6: Incident Management 104 time between when the server crash is detected and when the server is back online, and the application is functioning normally. The shorter the response time and resolution time, the better the incident management process performs and the less impact the incident has on the business Response time: Response time is the time that elapses between the initial identification of the incident and the time to begin working actively toward service restoration. The response is initiated by the and the customers. support group/analyst that will be resolving the incident: Note the response time measurement is often a big point of contention in many organizations: The response time must be viewed in relation to the priority of the incident, where a low priority incident might require a response time in hours rather than minutes. Response times should be separated into the time taken to acknowledge the receipt of an incident record or assignment versus the time taken to begin working on the incident. Viewing the time taken to acknowledge and accept an incident helps to avoid situations where incident records are sitting in an incorrect queue or have been overlooked. Resolution time: The resolution time is the time that elapses from the initial identification until the service is restored. Service may be restored either by an acceptable (to both user and IT) workaround or Target response and resolution times: Incident management response and resolution times relate to a level of process performance. Targets need to be achievable and negotiated with all stakeholders concerned. Individually negotiated service level agreements with customers/lines of business may take aj permanent solution. precedence over generic overall incident targets. Example: Incident management targets Priorit The target Response on The target resolution Resolution on time % 90% 90% 80% 70% y 1 2 3 4 response time 15 minutes 30: minutes Two hours time % 98% 99% 95% rime Three business hours Five business hours 10 business hours 16 business hours One business day 100%

Chapter 6: Incident Management 105 Super user: A trained user who has the capability to deal with certain first-level support issues and queries from other users, typically for a specific application area or geographical locations where there Failure: The loss of the ability to operate to specification or to deliver the required output. The term failure may be used when referring to IT services, capabilities, activities, and service components. A is no full-time support staff failure often causes an incident. Swarm (swarming): A collaborative approach to incident resolution Incident Management: Triggering Events and Inputs The process is triggered by an event that indicates a deviation from the expected or agreed-upon service level such as a failure or degradation of performance. These events can be detected by various sources such as monitoring tools, users, or service providers. Triggering events: Something has failed: Incidents from users a Incidents from technical staff Incidents detected by or logged by vendors Incidents from monitoring systems Something is about to fail. Monitoring and alerting events Something has failed: One type of triggering event is when something fails, meaning that a service component or function stops working completely or partially. For example, a server crash, a network outage, or a software bug can cause a failure. When something fails, the incident management process starts by logging the incident, assigning a priority and an owner, and notifying the relevant stakeholders. The incident owner then investigates the root cause and tries to resolve the issue or apply a workaround. The incident is closed when the service is restored to normal. Something is about to fail: Another type of triggering event is when something is about to fail, meaning that a service component or function is showing signs ofi impending failure or degradation. For example, a disk space shortage, a memory leak, or a security breach can indicate that something is about to fail. When something is about to fail, the incident management process starts by proactively identifying the potential incident, assessing the impact and urgency, and initiating preventive actions. The potential Monitoring and alerting events: This is the system or tools that are used to monitor the performance and availability of the IT services and infrastructure and to alert the support team or other actors when an incident occurs or a threshold is breached. Monitoring and alerting helps to detect incidents early, incident is resolved when the risk is eliminated or mitigated. reduce downtime, and improve service quality.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 106 Inputs: The change calendar Resources Policies Other? The change calendar, resources, and policies are all inputs into the incident management process because The change calendar is a tool that shows the planned changes to the IT infrastructure and services, as well as their status and impact. The change calendar helps to avoid conflicts and dependencies between changes and to coordinate the resources and stakeholders involved in the change process. The change calendar also helps to identify potential incidents that may arise from changes and to prepare Resources are the people, equipment, and materials that are needed to perform the incident management process. Resources include the incident management team, the service desk, the technical support staff, the vendors, and the customers. Resources also include the tools and systems that are used to record, track, monitor, and communicate incidents and their resolution. Resources help to ensure the incident Policies are the rules and guidelines that define the scope, objectives, roles, responsibilities, and procedures of the incident management process. Policies help to establish the standards and expectations for incident management and to align them with the business goals and requirements. Policies also help to ensure compliance with legal and regulatory obligations, as well as with best practices and they help to plan, execute, and evaluate the actions taken to resolve incidents. contingency plans accordingly. management process is efficient, effective, and consistent. frameworks for IT service management. Figure 11: Incident management triggering events and inputs Incident Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating Restored service Triggering events Something failed. Somethingi is about tot fail. Inputs events: and user The change calendar Resources Policies Other? acknowledgment are both terminating events of the incident management process because they indicate the incident has been resolved and normal operation has been restored.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 107 Restored service means the affected service or system is functioning again, and the impact on the users User acknowledgement means the users or customers who reported or experienced the incident have confirmed that the service or system is working as expected, and they are satisfied with the resolution. Both events are important to document and communicate, because they provide evidence of the effectiveness of the incident management process and the quality of the service or system. or customers has been minimized or eliminated. Examples of outputs: Updates: These are timely and accurate information about the progress and outcome of incidents. Updates can be provided to the users, the service desk, the incident manager, or other relevant parties. Updates can help maintain user satisfaction, reduce trustration, and avoid unnecessary Knowledge: This is the information. and expertise gained from handling incidents. Knowledge can be captured and stored in a knowledge base or a service component repository. Knowledge can help speed up the resolution of similar or recurring incidents, reduce errors, and enhance The identification of potential problems: These are incidents that indicate a deeper or underlying issue that may cause further disruptions or failures. Identification of potential problems can trigger the problem management process, which aims to prevent or eliminate the Changes: These are modifications or additions to the IT services or infrastructure that are required to resolve or prevent incidents. Changes can be initiated by the change management process, which ensures that changes are assessed, authorized, tested, implemented, and reviewed Opportunities for improvement: These are suggestions or recommendations for enhancing the performance or quality of IT services or processes. Opportunities for improvement can be identified by analyzing the incident data, feedback, or metrics. Opportunities for improvement can be implemented by the results and improvement process, which seeks to align IT services escalations. skills. root causes of incidents. in a controlled manner. with changing business needs and expectations. For example, suppose an employee reports a network outage that affects their work. The incident management process starts with logging the incident and assigning it a category, priority, impact, and urgency. Then, the incident is investigated and diagnosed by a technical support team. If the team finds a solution, they apply it and restore the normal service operation. This is the resolution event, and the output is a resolved incident record that documents how the incident was fixed. Then, the employee is notified about the resolution and asked to confirm that the issue is resolved. If the employee confirms,

Chapter 6: Incident Management 108 the incident is formally closed, and the incident management process ends. This is the closure event, and the output is a closed incident record that documents how the incident was closed. Terminating event Outputs Fig Restored service(s) en minating eve Updates Usera acknowledged Knowledge Potential problems Changes Opportunities for improvement Incident Management: Themes and Activities These support the purpose of incident management to minimize the disruption of business activities by restoring service(s) as quickly as possible. The: incident management processes. have the following themes and activities. Process themes for incident management: Incident capture analysis: This theme involves collecting and verifying information about the incident such as its source, impact/severity, priority, and root cause. The activities that support this theme include logging the incident, categorizing it, assigning it to a responsible party, and Response: This theme involves taking appropriate actions to restore the service or minimize the damage caused by the incident. The activities that support this theme include communicating with the affected stakeholders, implementing workarounds or temporary solutions, and Solve: This theme involves finding and applying a solution to the incident. The activities that support this theme include testing and validating the solution, documenting the resolution, Review: This theme involves evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency of the incident management process and identifying areas for improvement. The activities that support this theme include conducting a post-incident review, analyzing the root cause and lessons learned, escalating it if needed. coordinating with other teams or external parties. closing the incident, and updating the knowledge base. reporting on the performance metrics, and implementing corrective actions. Potential activities: Logging and categorizing incidents based on their priority and impact

Chapter 6: Incident Management 109 Assigning and escalating incidents to the appropriate support teams or specialists Investigating and diagnosing the root cause of incidents and applying workarounds or solutions Communicating with the affected users and stakeholders about the status and resolution of incidents Closing and reviewing incidents and recording the lessons learned The following table provides a description of each activity in the incident management high-level process flow diagram: Activity Capture and analysis: Incident identification and logging Description Incidents may be identified by many sources that include users, service providers, the monitoring of key IT services, and service components. Incidents should be identified as soon as possible as a first step to Where monitoring tools may be used, automated identification and resolution may be possible before users are impacted. Such automation. may All incidents must be documented according to predefined attributes based on their incident type to facilitate categorization and prioritization and to minimizing their impact on users. cover all or some of steps one through seven. Capture and analysis: Incident prioritization start documenting a full historical record. categorization and At a minimum, the following incident details are input during the initial incident recording: Unique reference number Date/time recorded Name and/or group recording the incident Name/departmenu/phone/location of user Description of symptoms Activities undertaken to resolve the incident Incidents are categorized so the exact type of record is logged. Incidents are prioritized based on predefined and agreed-upon models to determine when, how, and by whom the incident will be managed. For high-priority incidents, separate procedures (such as a major incident procedure) may be used for subject matter (lateral) or management escalation.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 110 Activity Response: Investigation and diagnosis Description incident. An initial diagnosis is the first attempt to investigate and diagnose the The service desk performs the initial diagnosis for typically low-priority incidents for which the users have contacted them. This is ideally done while the user is still in contact (by phone, chat, walk-in, etc.) or when an email is first picked up. Ideally, such incidents can be successfully resolved and Not all incidents are initially diagnosed by the service desk: closed. When higher-priority incidents are detected by the service desk, the typical escalation is immediately transferred to subject matter expert When event tools detect an incident, an alert is typically sent directly to a Escalation can be subject matter based and/or management based, and this can happen in parallel or in sequence with the stakeholders involved. The escalation is the responsibility of the initial diagnosis group and requires a A subject matter escalation is initiated when additional subject matter expertise or domain knowledge is required  upon it becoming clear that an advanced diagnosis is needed. In such situations, incidents must be escalated to the appropriate next-level support team. This may be a second or third level support team depending on the situation and the predefined escalation High-priority incidents may need to be communicated to higher authorities for possible management intervention if the priority is found to be higher than first assessed such as a collaboration between teams that isn't happening, or when target response and/or resolution times may be teams best suited to handle the initial diagnosis. specified technical team. Response: Escalation clear set of rules and escalation procedures. procedures. breached.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 111 Activity Response: The advanced investigation and diagnosis Description The investigation and diagnosis may be started and completed at the service desk or by an initial technical team where analysts delve into the incident to When escalated to second or third-level support, the investigation and diagnosis may involve single teams or cross-functional teams swarming to Following the elimination. of a previous possible cause, the investigation and diagnosis may also become an iterative capability that starts with a different specialist support group. It may involve multisite support groups and support staff from different vendors. It may continue overnight with a new shift of support staff taking over the next day. This requires a rigorous, disciplined approach as well as a comprehensive record of actions taken, After a successful investigation and diagnosis, resolution options can be determined, and the optimal service recovery actions can be carried out. This is often done by specialist staff (second or third-level support) depending on the complexity of the technology and the impact level of the incident. All events and actions during the resolution and solving activity should be documented in the incident record SO that a full history is maintained. The owner of the incident record will close the record. determine solutions and next steps. find a resolution in a timely way. along with corresponding results. Solve: Resolution and solving Solve: Closing incidents and communication with effected users They should ensure: readable The details of the actions taken to resolve the incident are concise and A resolution/action is agreed upon with the customer verbally or, All details applicable to this phase of the incident control are recorded, preferably, by email or in writing such that: The customer is satisfied (if user impacting) The time spent on the incident is recorded The person, date, and time of closure are recorded Review: Incident A post-incident review is to be led by the incident owner/service owner if it's determined it will add value to drive further improvement to any the individual incident (especially with regard to restoring service faster) or This activity is typically conducted for all major and high-priority incidents and for specific incidents such as those mishandled or those that significantly of aspect review to the incident management process as a whole. breach resolution targets.

Chapter 6: Incident Management The major incident approach: 112 Major incidents are referred to undergo a separate approach with shorter timelines and greater urgency. The decision criteria for major incidents are defined, agreed upon, and documented within the Major incidents are handled in a separate nonlinear manner. Typically, all key stakeholders will stop normal work and assemble (swarm) in a shared conference room and/or on a shared call bridge. After an initial triage, the applicable support groups stay engaged while others stand by (in case they are: needed) until the service is restored. A blameless post-incident retrospective is used to determine what. happened, how to prevent similar incidents, and how to improve the major incident management process. organization's incident management prioritization models. Ownership, monitoring, tracking, and communication The service desk is responsible for owning and overseeing the resolution of all outstanding incidents that Incidents that derive from other sources and are not user-impacting may be owned by the initiating are reported by and impact users. function or group. The owner of the incident record will: Regularly monitor all open incidents for their status, progress toward resolution, and service level Monitor incidents that move between different specialist support groups, because this may be indicative of uncertainty and, possibly, a dispute between support staff. In excessive cases, Keep affected users informed of the progress, optimally via authorized communication channels Will close the incident record, which may involve assigning closure to the service desk where the commitments incidents may be referred to problem management Give priority to monitoring high-impact incidents Check for similar incidents service desk skills and experience for full documentation are required Incident Management: Actors and Roles The incident management process involves various actors who play different roles in ensuring incidents are detected, reported, resolved, and prevented. The following are some of the main actors and their responsibilities: End user: This is the person who is affected by an incident or who reports an incident. The end user provides information about the incident, its impact, and its resolution status. The end user Support team(s): This is the group of people who are responsible for providing technical support and resolving incidents. The support team follows the incident management process and uses tools and procedures to diagnose and fix incidents. The support team also communicates with the end user and other stakeholders about the incident's progress and resolution. also verifies that the incident is resolved satisfactorily.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 113 Incident coordinator: This is the person who is responsible for coordinating thei incident response and recovery activities. The incident coordinator assigns roles and tasks to the support team members, escalates incidents to higher levels of support or management, and facilitates communication and collaboration among the actors. The incident coordinator also documents All the processes include the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include: In addition to the generic manager role, the incident manager also has key responsibilities to: and analyzes the incident data and reports. The incident manager Ensure the incident management process operates effectively and efficiently through first-, Work with the service desk manager to ensure the service desk is established as a single point of Ensure incidents are resolved in a proper and timely manner and that the resolutions adhere to Note that in many organizations this responsibility is performed by a separate role typically second-, and third-line support as well as third-party organizations Function as a point of hierarchical escalation for incident analysts the objectives set forth in the service-level agreements Facilitate the coordination of major incidents contact within the end-user community referred to as the major incident manager or major incident commander Additional responsibilities may include: Identifying the training requirements of first-, second-, and third-line support staff and ensuring Ensuring remedial action takes place if it is discovered that contacts are going directly to second Facilitating the resolution of incidents in a proper and timely manner because it is the end Highlighting customer and end-user training and education. needs through trend analyses and Contributing to the identification of recurring outages through trend analyses SO that problem management is notified for assistance in eliminating recurring incidents the business wants to Escalating to line management and the incident management process owner in the event of a Promoting the service desk with the end-user community through the maintenance of a web page, informational emails, bulletins, and training service desk staff in communication skills Providing service desk staff with appropriate information to enable them to effectively perform their function. This includes capability information, technical knowledge, record allocation proper training is provided to meet the requirements or third-line staff members instead of the service desk responsibility of incident management ensuring that proper training is provided where necessary eliminate Auditing the incident management process conflict between the process and line management where needed information, and access to known issue information

Chapter 6: Incident Management The major incident manager 114 Facilitates the situation room'and ensures the appropriate collaboration tools are in place and utilized Accountable for following the agreed-upon procedures Integrates incident and problem management processes Ensures the presence of the service desk The major incident process owner Ideally, the major incident management process has a separate and distinct owner from the normal incident management process to ensure a separation of duties and enabling opportunities for career progression. The incident management analyst In addition to the generic analyst role, the incident analyst also has key responsibilities to: Be a subject matter expert in a specific technology platform Understand how the specific technology fits in with the overall IT service Additional responsibilities include: Being a respected member of a department who is able to combine daily departmental activities with the coordination role Knowing how to'get things done'The service desk Logs all relevant incident/service request details, allocating categorization and prioritization Provides first-level investigation and diagnosis for user-based incidents and requests Escalating incidents/service requests that they cannot resolve within agreed-upon timescales Communication with users  keeping them informed of the incident's progress, notitying them codes Resolving those incidents/service requests that they are able to Keeping users informed of progress Conducting customer/user satisfaction callbacks/surveys as agreed upon ofi impending changes or agreed-upon outages, etc.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 115 Incident Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are example critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Effective communication of incidents to all stakeholders KPIs: The percentage of satisfaction in areas of communication: The number of surveys distributed The average rating on communication survey questions The number of updates per time frame per incident The target for incident updates by priority The percentage of incident record updates against service targets by impact/ severity: CSF: Quickly resolve incidents. KPIS: The percentage increase in the incidents resolved by the first-line support or first The reduced mean elapsed time for the resolution or mitigation of incidents that are The reduction in the number of incidents requiring escalation to more than one second The percentage improvement in customer satisfaction score responses on the incident response grouped by service, category, and closure code The reduction in service unavailability caused by incidents line support team The percentage reduction in the average cost of handling incidents management response and restoration. CSF: Maintain service quality. KPIS: The reduction of the incident backlog The percentage reduction in the overall average time to resolve incidents The percentage increase in the incidents fixed before users notice The percentage reduction in the number of incidents reopened The percentage number of incidents compared to incoming calls (this is a metric) The percentage reduction of incidents incorrectly assigned The percentage reduction of incidents incorrectly categorized The percentage reduction of incidents without a sufficient work log history The increased percentage of incidents resolved within target times by priority The percentage reduction in the average time for second-line support to respond

Chapter 6: Incident Management 116 CSF: Meet agreed-upon service level targets and improve IT and business productivity. KPIS: The increased percentage of incidents resolved within agreed-upon (in SLAs) response The percentage reduction in the overall average time to resolve incidents The percentage reduction in the average time for first-line support to respond to a call The increased percentage of incidents resolved within target times by priority and by The percentage reduction in the average time for second-line support to respond The percentage reduction in the length of the queue time waiting for a service desk times by impact code for assistance category response Incident Management: Integrations One of the goals of IT service management is to ensure the IT services are aligned with the business needs and objectives. To achieve this, various processes need to be integrated and coordinated with each other. Key processintegrations fori incident management include incident management and change management, Change management: Incident management is the process of restoring the normal service operation as quickly as possible after an interruption or degradation of service. Change management is the process of controlling the life cycle of all changes to the IT services to ensure they are implemented in a planned and authorized manner. Incident management and change management need to be integrated because some incidents may require changes to resolve them, and some changes may cause incidents or affect the resolution of incidents. Therefore, the incident management process should have a mechanism to request changes, escalate incidents to change management, and communicate with change management about the status and impact of changes. Similarly, the change management process should have a mechanism to assess the risk and impact of changes on incidents, notify incident management about planned and unplanned changes, and coordinate with incident management for the testing and implementation of and incident management and problem management. changes. Change management: Change management will assist incident management with the coordination of requested Change management provides the change calendar to the service desk and incident management to maintain a high-level awareness of the changes scheduled and those recently implemented in Change management will assist the incident manager/incident owner with post-incident and/or post-change reviews, especially when it has been determined the incident was the result of a change. Incident management escalates emergency changes to support service restoration. Incident management will identify changes that have, or are suspected of having, triggered one changes and the resolution of the incident. case an incident occurs that is related to those changes. or more incidents.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 117 Problem management is the process of identifying and eliminating the root causes of incidents and preventing their recurrence. Incident management and problem management need to be integrated because problem management relies on incident data to: identify problems, analyze trends, and prioritize actions. Moreover, problem management provides incident management with workarounds and known issues to speed up the resolution of incidents. Therefore, the incident management process should have al mechanism to record incident details, categorize incidents, link incidents to problems or. known issues, and communicate with problem management about the status and impact of incidents. Likewise, the problem management process should have a mechanism to access incident data, create problems from incidents, update incidents with workarounds or known issues, and communicate with incident management about the status and impact of problems. Problem management: To assist with incident investigation and diagnosis, problem management makes available workarounds, problem records, and known issues related to prior incident records and service Problem management will flag problem records when repeat incidents are identified through a Incident management supports problem management activities through incident categorization. Incident management will provide feedback on problems, known issues, and workarounds Incident management notifies problem management when recurring incidents are detected or Incident management will provide the initial workarounds and resolution information to assist components. trend analysis of incident records. because they are used to assisting with incident resolutions. when an incident is unusual and requires a problem investigation. with problem management activities. Examples of other process integrations include: Security management: Assumes the ownership of incidents that are classified as security incidents For the escalation of incidents and invoking the ITSCM procedures as defined IT service continuity management (ITSCM): Configuration management: Configuration management service models in the service component repository support the Configuration management ensures the data and relationships within the service component repository are accurate and complete and are provided to incident management. Incident management ensures all logged incidents are registered against available service Incident management provides feedback and corrections for missing or incorrect information. in incident management failure impact analysis. component records. the service component repository.

Chapter 6: Incident Management Service level management (SLM): 118 Service level requirements specify the level of support and the specified incident resolution times Service level agreements provide information to incident management relating to the agreed Incident management provides the incident record information. used in SLA performance calculations and the service performance reviews with the business/customers. requested by the customer. upon and acceptable levels of service. Request management: Request management redirects requests that are actually incidents to incident management. Request management notifies incident management of the incidents triggered when executing Incident management redirects incidents that are actually requests (such as password resets) to Incident management may use one or more requests in the request catalog to resolve an incident, the requests. request management. such as requesting the resetting of passwords for user accounts. Release and deployment management (RDM): RDM provides information. to incident and problem management regarding any known defects RDM ensures that hypercare support is in place when required to support deployment and Incident management provides feedback and the identification of incidents as a result of release Release and deployment management may be involved in the resolution activities for emergency or errors and the potential workarounds that are part of a release. release-related incidents. and deployment activities. changes raised by incident management. Business relationship management (BRM): BRM assists with communication and feedback with users and customers for higher priority Incident management provides information. and status updates to BRM for higher priority incidents. incidents.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 119 Incident Management: Enablers Enablers are essential components of any business process because they help to ensure its smooth and effective operation. In incident management, enablers can be classified into three main categories  tools Tools and technology are the software and hardware systems that support the incident management process. They enable the identification, logging, tracking, resolution, and closure of incidents. Examples of tools and technology for incident management are ticketing systems, monitoring systems, and technology, resources, and process documentation. communication platforms, knowledge bases, and automation tools. Some key technologies required to support the process include: The ITSM tool integrates with monitoring and event correlation engines to enable quick and early automated incident detection, registration, and resolution (self-healing) with confirmation that The ITSM tool automatically generates alarms/alerts and tracks timely replies/responses with The ITSM tool provides and/or integrates with knowledge management tools and configuration The ITSM tool integrates with real-time communication and the collaboration tools and chatbots to facilitate cooperation with onsite/remote specialists and users (e.g. diagnosis, swarming) The ITSM tool has clear criteria and categories (e.g., to distinguish major incidents from disasters and other types of incidents, service requests, change requests, and problems) The ITSM tool supports the assessment of urgency, impact, and prioritization independently of The ITSM tool supports incident models and automated workflows that are defined and executed (e.g, repeat or similar incidents), including task assignments to an individual or specialist group The ITSM tool enables the automated association of patterns of operations and incident records The ITSM tool integrates with remote administration tools and automated deployment systems The ITSM tool integrates with or includes survey tools to measure the service consumers/partnerg The ITSM tool facilitates measurable SLA resolution targets to be established based on the urgency, impact, service component, service, user, etc., along with pre-breach and breach notification and the fix was successfully applied automated escalation and executes standard routing procedures management tools one another with known issues, as well as proven and tested solutions to expedite incident resolution and vendors'experience escalations.

Chapter 6: Incident Management 120 Resources are thel human and physical assets that are involved in the incident management process. They include the people who perform the roles and responsibilities of incident management such as incident managers, service desk agents, technical specialists, and stakeholders. Resources also include the facilities, equipment, and materials that are needed to handle incidents such as workstations, servers, Process documentation is the set of documents that define and describe the incident management process. It includes policies, standards, procedures, guidelines, templates, forms, and reports. Process documentation helps to establish a common understanding of the incident management process among all participants. It also helps to ensure consistency, compliance, quality, and improvement of the process. networks, spare parts, and documentation. Other potential enablers of incident management: Training and awareness: This involves educating and informing the staff and stakeholders about the incident management process, its objectives, benefits, roles, responsibilities, procedures, and best practices. Training and awareness help to improve the skills and knowledge of the staff and stakeholders involved in incident management. It also helps to increase their engagement and Metrics and measurement: This involves collecting and analyzing data related to the performance and outcomes of the incident management process. Metrics and measurement help to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the process. They also help to identify strengths, Results and improvement: This involves applying a systematic approach to monitor, review, and improve the incident management process on an ongoing basis. Improvements help to ensure the process meets the changing needs and expectations of the customers and stakeholders. They also commitment to the process. weaknesses, opportunities, and areas for improvement. help to enhance the quality and value of the service delivered by the process.

Chapter 7: Request Management Request Management: Purpose and Objectives The purpose of the request management process is to respond to and manage end-user requests according to their corresponding value streams and workflows to meet agreed-upon performance and Purpose: To address end-user requests using defined workflows to meet the agreed-upon performance Request management is the process of handling, fulfilling, and tracking requests from customers or end users for specific services or products. It supports business objectives by ensuring the requests are aligned with the service level agreements, prioritized according to the business value and urgency, and delivered within the expected time and quality. Request management also enables the business to monitor and measure the performance and satisfaction of the service providers and the customers, and to identify areas for improvement or optimization. By implementing service request management, the business can improve customer loyalty, reduce costs, increase efficiency and productivity, and achieve its strategic service quality expectations. and service delivery standards goals. Request: End user-initiated; a common query for a service or product A request is defined as end user-initiated and a common query for a service or product. This definition fits into the request management process by ensuring the requests are aligned with the business needs For example, if an end user requests a new laptop, the request management process would verify the request is valid, authorized, prioritized, and fulfilled according to the service level agreement and the and expectations of the customers. available resources. Key objectives include: User-friendly channel(s) for submitting requests The optimization of request workflows

Chapter 7: Request Management Additional objectives may include: 122 Providing information. to IT customers about the availability of services and the procedure for Establishing a close link with the service level management process to obtain necessary request response and provisioning targets; reviewing request provisioning times so they meet the goals Maintaining IT customer satisfaction and a positive customer experience through the effective obtaining them set forth in the established service level agreements (SLAs) and efficient handling of all IT requests Request management benefits: The quick and effective access to standard services that end users can use to improve their Reducing the friction or bureaucracy involved in requesting and receiving access to existing or productivity or the quality of business services and products new services Reducing the cost of providing standard services A standardized service provisioning approach that increases the level of control over requested services, reduces negotiation costs with vendors, and reduces the cost of support Ensuring the IT service provider is better aligned to real-time business priorities and can allocate resources as necessary Improved user and customer satisfaction A frictionless user experience

Chapter 7: Request Management 123 Request Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization" "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy Statement Prioritization The prioritization of all requests will occur through the use of the agreed-upon prioritization model and input from the requestor. The reason for the policy This policy area defines how service requests are ranked according to their urgency, impact, and value. A prioritization policy helps to allocate resources and time to the most important requests Benefits The priority level determines the time and the escalation path for each request. Ensures the appropriate efficiency by determining the sequence in which a request will be put forward based on the impact, urgency, and expected effort response An example of a prioritization and avoid delays or conflicts. policy is: Service requests are categorized into four levels  critical, high, medium, and low. Critical requests are those that affect the core business functions or pose a serious risk to the organization. High requests are those that have a significant impact on the performance or quality of the services. Medium requests are those that have a moderate impact on the services or the users. Low requests are those that have a minor impact or are cosmetic changes. 9 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy." Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 7: Request Management Policy Statement A consistent approach One request management approach based on ITSM best practices will be utilized throughout the organization. An example of a consistent requests are processed according to the same set of standards and procedures. The service providers follow the best practices and guidelines for each type of request and use the same tools and systems for communication, documentation, and reporting. Defined workflows A standard process will be used to request and manage the request life cycle. An example of a defined workflow policy is: Each service request follows a predefined workflow that consists of five stages submission, approval, planning, implementation, and evaluation. 124 The reason for the policy This policy area ensures all service requests are handled in a similar manner regardless of their type, source, or complexity. A consistent approach policy helps to improve customer satisfaction, Benefits The service providers adhere to the same service level agreements (SLAS) and key performance indicators (KPIS) for each request. An improved response time for the fulfillment of requests Consistency in service delivery Improved customer communication, satisfaction, and experience Improved management information approach policy is: All service reduce errors, and increase efficiency. This policy area specifies the steps and roles involved in fulfilling a service request from initiation to closure. A defined workflow policy helps to standardize the process and ensure consistency, accountability, and transparency. Roles and responsibilities of the requestor, the service provider, and other stakeholders are clearly defined. The workflow includes checkpoints and approvals to ensure quality and compliance.

Chapter 7: Request Management Policy Statement Defined targets Defined and agreed-upon service fulfillment targets only apply to standard predefined and approved service offerings published in the service catalog. 125 The reason for the policy This policy area establishes the expected outcomes and measures of success for each service request. A defined target policy helps to monitor and evaluate the performance and quality of the service request management process Benefits The goal and metrics are agreed upon by both the requestor and the service provider at the beginning of the process and are tracked throughout its execution. Managed customer expectations on fulfillment time frames Support demand shaping by encouraging customers to request standard offerings An example of a defined target and identify areas for policy is: Each service request improvement. has a specific goal and a set of metrics that indicate its completion and success. The goal defines what the request aims to achieve or deliver in terms of functionality, quality, or value. The metrics quantify how well the request meets the goal in terms of time, cost, scope, or satisfaction.

Chapter 7: Request Management Policy Statement The addition of new service requests Requests that are submitted that are not on the standard list will be assigned to the appropriate subject matter area for discussion, sizing, and approval. Non-standard requests are not covered under predefined fulfillment or provisioning service level agreements. An example of a new service request policy is: New service requests are proposed by either the users or the service providers based on their requirements or feedback. The proposed requests are reviewed by a committee that assesses their feasibility, cost, benefit, and alignment with the strategic goals of the organization. 126 The reason for the policy This policy area determines how new types of service requests are identified, evaluated, and added to the service catalog. A new service request policy helps to ensure the service catalog is updated and aligned with the changing needs and expectations of the users and the organization. Benefits Approved requests are added to the service catalog and assigned a priority level and a workflow. Reduces the possibility of the request process inadvertently implementing a request for change (RFC) Ensures that change management is notified of any requests that fall outside of the agreed-upon scope for request management SO that further action can occur if warranted

Chapter 7: Request Management 127 Request Management: Terms and Definitions Requests for predefined service offerings are frequently managed via a service catalog and/or automated service provisioning platform such as a software store. Requests may be linked to a request for change (RFC) as part of fulfilling the request. The scope of the request management process includes requests for products and services provided by IT that have been defined by IT as being a product or service, have predefined approval and a fulfillment workflow, and are not otherwise within the defined scope of incident management or change management. User-initiated requests for standard service offerings may include: Preapproved/low-risk changes (examples): a A new user onboarding a A1 new phone setup Workstation moves A: new workstation setup  PC, thin client, or laptop Modifications to an employee profile: Business application access [access management  new, modify, terminate Installation of standard software Hardware Phones User offboarding based on a resignation or termination Other types of IT requests (examples): a A password reset a Information requests Compliments and complaints Print services  printer ink cartridge requests An email distribution list creation Request workflows and provisioning activities: Request management can potentially have hundreds of detailed request workflows to define, optimize, For example, each standard service offering in the service catalog may have different process steps for assessment, authorization, and fulfillment. These steps can be both parallel as well as sequential and be provisioned by a variety of both internal and external stakeholders. To optimize, automate, and establish standard fulfillment targets for these individual process workflows, it is necessary to define, document, A key challenge for request management is to enable business customers with a balance between a variety of standard offering workflows while also being mindful of not having to support too much and potentially automate. and map the value stream. complexity that will lead to poor performance and a poor customer experience.

Chapter 7: Request Management Request catalog 128 The request catalog is a collection of identified requests that users can submit via an ITSM solution that allows users to browse, select, and submit requests for various services and resources. It includes a list of predefined request types such as access to applications, hardware, software, and the network, as well as the option to capture feedback or support preapproved changes. The request catalog supports a user self-service strategy by enabling users to initiate and track their own requests without having to contact the IT department or wait for approvals. This reduces the workload of the IT staff and improves the efficiency and satisfaction of the users. The request catalog is best understood as a subset of a full or complete service catalog focused on enabling end-user requests. Request catalog attributes include: A collection of identified requests that users can submit Provides access to IT resources available within an organization Helps standardize the request process and improve the efficiency and quality of service delivery Allows users to browse through available IT services, hardware, software, and support options Request Management: Triggering Events and Inputs The request management process is a set of steps that ensures end-user requests are handled efficiently and effectively. The process starts when an end user submits a request for a service or a change, such as installing new software or requesting access to a system. Triggering events An end user submitted a request As service owner submits a new workflow requirement The request is then routed to the appropriate service owner, who is responsible for fulfilling the request or approving the change. The service owner may also submit a new workflow requirement, which is a specification of how the request should be processed and who should be involved. For example, the service owner may require the request is approved by a manager or that it is configured by a desktop technician before implementation. The new workflow requirement triggers the request management process to define the new workflow to be used by the request management process. Upon completion, the new request would be available to be selected by users. The following are some examples of inputs for this process and how they are used: Inputs: Request authorization IT asset management information, user policies, and request procedures Standard changes, where these are part of a request Existing vendor contracts to support predefined request fulfillment Policies Other?

Chapter 7: Request Management 129 Request authorization: This is the approval or rejection of a request based on predefined criteria such as the requester's role, the type of request, the impact and risk of the request, and the availability of resources. Request authorization ensures only valid and authorized requests are processed and fulfilled. IT asset management information: This is the data about the IT assets that are available, allocated, or in use by the organization  such as hardware, software, licenses, or consumables. IT asset management information. helps to identify what resources are needed or available to fulfill a request and to track and User policies: These are the rules and guidelines that define the rights and responsibilities of users regarding the use of IT services, products, or information. User policies help to inform users about what they can request, how to request it, what to expect from the request fulfillment, and how to provide Request procedures: These are the steps and activities that describe how to perform a request from initiation to closure such as how to submit a request, how to review and approve a request, how to assign and execute a request, how to monitor and report on a request, and how to close and evaluate a request. Request procedures help to standardize and streamline the request management process and Standard changes: These are low-risk, preapproved changes that are frequently requested by users such as password resets, access rights changes, or software installations. Standard changes are often part of a request and can be fulfilled without going through the full change management process. Standard changes help to reduce the workload and complexity of the request management process and improve Existing vendor contracts: These are the agreements between the organization and external providers that specify the terms and conditions for delivering IT services, products, or information to support the request fulfillment. Existing vendor contracts help to ensure the organization has access to the required resources and capabilities from external sources and that the quality and cost of the request fulfillment update the status and configuration of the assets involved in a request. feedback or escalate issues. ensure consistency and quality in the request fulfillment. the efficiency and responsiveness of request fulfillment. are aligned with the expectations and objectives of both parties. Triggering events An end user submitted a request As service owner submits new workflow requirement Inputs Request authorization ITa asset management information, user policies, and request procedures Standard changes, where these are part of a request Existing vendor contracts to support predefined request fulfillment Policies Other? Figure 13: Request management triggering events and inputs

Chapter 7: Request Management 130 Request Management: Terminating Events and Outputs The service request process ends when either the request is fulfilled and the user confirms their satisfaction, or when the service owner enables a new request workflow that supersedes the previous one. In both cases, the system closes the request and updates the status accordingly: As service request is realized, and the user is satisfied. New request workflows are enabled for end users. A1 request catalog of all predefined requests An updated request record Opportunities for improvement The outputs of this process include: Updates to the IT asset repository and service component database A request catalog of all predefined requests: This is a document that lists the available types of requests that users can make such as ordering ai new laptop, resetting a password, or requesting access to a system. The request catalog helps users to find and select the appropriate request type and provides information An updated request record: This is a record that captures the details of each individual request such as the requester, the request type, the status, the priority, and the fulfillment date. The request record helps to track and monitor the progress of each request and provides an audit trail for quality assurance and Updates to the IT asset repository and service component database: These are repositories that store information about the IT assets and service components that support the delivery of IT services. The updates reflect the changes that occur as a result of fulfilling user requests such as adding, modifying, or removing assets or components. The updates help to maintain the accuracy and completeness of the IT asset and service component information and enable effective configuration management and service Opportunities for improvement: These are suggestions or recommendations for enhancing the efficiency, effectiveness, or quality of the request management process or its outputs. The opportunities fori improvement are: identified through various methods such as feedback surveys, performance metrics, audits, or reviews. The opportunities for improvement help to drive results and improvement and on the costs, approval requirements, and fulfillment time frames for each request. compliance purposes. asset management. increase customer satisfaction. Terminating event Outputs As service request is realized, and the user is satisfied Newi request workflows enabled for end users Ar request catalog of all predefinedi requests An updated request record Updates tot the IT asset repository and service component database Opportunities for improvement Figure 14: Request management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 7: Request Management 131 Request Management: Themes and Activities Themes of service request management: Define clear channels to submit and receive requests: This could involve creating a request catalog that lists the available services and their descriptions, costs, and delivery times. The request catalog could be published on a web portal, an intranet, chatbot, or a mobile app where users can browse, select, and order the services they need. Alternatively, users could contact a service desk or a self-help tool to submit their requests. The service provider should also establish clear communication channels to inform users about the status of their requests such as email Define request workflows and targets: This could involve designing and documenting the steps and roles involved in fulfilling each type of service request such as approval, assignment, scheduling, delivery, and closure. The service provider should also define the service level agreements (SLAs) and operations agreements that specify the expected quality, timeliness, and cost of each service request. The SLAs should be aligned with the business needs and expectations Request monitoring, tracking, and realization: This could involve using tools and techniques to measure and report on the performance and outcomes of each service request such as key performance indicators (KPIS), metrics, dashboards, and reports. The service provider should also monitor and track the resources, costs, and risks associated with each service request such as staff, equipment, materials, and budget. The service provider should also ensure the service requests are delivered according to the agreed-upon SLAs and vendor contracts, and that the notifications, SMS messages, or online dashboards. of the users and the service provider. users are satisfied with the results. The following table provides an example of request management process activities: Activity Define clear and receive requests: Request identification Description guidance in: What to log How to log How to prioritize When and how to escalate The service desk or designated request agents, including automated agents, channels to submit will log the requests applying agreed-upon policies and procedures that give All requests are authenticated as to the end user and the service or product to which the request pertains. End users will be updated as per policy and procedure guidelines with respect to the receipt, status, and/or approval of the request.

Chapter 7: Request Management 132 Activity Define clear and receive requests: Request prioritization Request monitoring, tracking, and realization: workflows for requestable service offerings. Description All requests are validated as actual requests within the scope of the request scope are passed to the appropriate process such as incident, change, or Requests are categorized as to the type of request/service affected, etc. by channels to submit management process before proceeding. The requests considered outside of continuous improvement for further action. categorization and using a categorization model and are then prioritized according to the prioritization model. Request management will enable and support many requestable service offerings. Each service offering will need to have a defined workflow that is optimized, has established measurable targets and automation. The following are example action steps. Establish standard Assess the current workflow: Map the current process: Understand the existing request management workflow; document each step, the stakeholders involved, and the pain Identify bottlenecks: Pinpoint the areas where delays occur or where points. manual intervention. is extensive. Define workflow objectives and targets: Set clear objectives and targets: Define the target state expectations for provisioning, satisfaction, and experience per request workflow. Determine the performance: measures and reporting requirements: Establish metrics to measure defined objectives and targets. Streamline steps: Using Lean approaches, remove redundant or unnecessary steps to make the process more efficient. Identify bottlenecks: Identify points in the process that are constrained due to issues of capacity or process step limitations. Focus improvement efforts on these bottlenecks to improve overall flow. Optimize the workflow: Configure workflow automation: Automate routine tasks: Identify tasks that can be automated through an Integrate tools: Ensure seamless integration between various ITSM tools and platforms to minimize manual data entry and facilitate information Utilize workflow automation tools within the ITSM solution to automate Test automation rules: Thoroughly test automation. rules to ensure they ITSM workflow tool and provisioning automation. flow. repetitive tasks, approvals, notifications, and routing. function as intended without causing errors.

Chapter 7: Request Management 133 Activity Description Monitor and refine: Monitor performance: Continuously monitor the workflow using established targets to identify any deviations or areas needing Gather feedback: Collect feedback from end users and IT staff to understand their experience with the new workflow. Iterate and improve: Based on feedback and performance data, refine the workflow iteratively to enhance efficiency and effectiveness. Train users: Provide training sessions to employees involved in the request management process to ensure they understand the new Document changes: Update documentation, service catalog entries and knowledge base materials to reflect the optimized workflow for future improvement. Training and documentation: workflow and tools. reference. Continuous improvement: Encourage innovation: Foster a culture of continuous improvement by encouraging suggestions for further enhancements from team members. Periodic reviews: Schedule regular reviews to assess the effectiveness of the workflow and make necessary adjustments. According to policies and procedures, the request is passed to the appropriate personnel to be fulfilled. Upon fulfillment, the next activity  Request monitoring, tracking, and realization: Request fulfillment Request monitoring, tracking, and realization: Request closure request closure  begins. When completed, the initiating requestor is notified of the fulfillment via manual or automated methods and the request record is closed. If satisfaction has not occurred and further support is required, the request is made active again and pertinent information is appended to the request, and it: is sent back for categorization/prioritization. Ownership, monitoring, tracking, and communication The ownership of a user-initiated standard request belongs to the service desk. For some requests, such as those with automated workflows and assignments, the ownership may belong to specific and Communication takes place between the service desk and the user/customer as well as IT personnel when designated fulfillment roles. needed and indicated according to policies and procedures.

Chapter 7: Request Management ITSM tools will ensure all requests are: 134 Monitored to make sure they are moving along the process path in a timely manner Tracked to ensure all actions are logged at an appropriate level of detail SO the service desk or request owner can give an account of what has transpired in the life of a request Designed SO end users/requestors have the ability to track the progress and status of a request via automated means Request Management: Actors and Roles The service request management process involves various actors who have different roles and responsibilities. The following are some of the main actors and their descriptions: The end user: This is the person who initiates a service request to obtain a service or product from the service provider. The end user may be an internal or external customer of the service provider. The end user provides the necessary information. and approvals for the service request The request modeler: This is the person who defines and maintains the request models that are used to standardize and automate the service request management process. The request modeler identifies the inputs, outputs, activities, roles, and workflows for each type of service request. The request modeler also configures the request fulfillment tools and systems to support the request The request coordinator: This is the person who is responsible for managing the life cycle of a service request from initiation to closure. The request coordinator monitors the progress and status of the service request, communicates with the end user and other stakeholders, escalates issues and risks, and ensures the service request is fulfilled within the agreed-upon time, cost, Support teams: These are the groups or individuals who perform the activities required to fulfill a service request. The support teams may include technical, functional, vendor, or business experts who have the skills and resources to deliver the requested service or product. The support teams follow the instructions and guidelines provided by the request modeler and the request to be processed. models. and quality. coordinator. All the processes include the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include: In addition to the generic manager role, the request manager also has key responsibilities to: The request manager Work closely with service catalog management and service level management for close Provide awareness of the defined standard offerings in the service catalog and what IT can deliver Work with product and service owners to define workflows for standard service offerings interactions between these process areas to the business

Chapter 7: Request Management 135 Work closely with the service management tool and automated service provisioning teams to automate standard service offering workflows The request analyst In addition to the generic coordinator role, the request analyst also has key responsibilities to: Receive, analyze, and evaluate individual requests both simple and complex Log and update request records with all the relevant request details, as well as allocate Dispatch and assign activities to the individual subject matter expert members of the team while Communicate with users  keep them informed of the request progress for non-standard requests Understand the process, procedures, work instructions, policies, required documentation, and Use the process, procedures, work instructions, policies, required documentation, and tools as Analyze the usage and performance data for their specific service area and report on the performance against targets contained in the SLAs; escalate to the functional manager or request Conduct quality assurance for completed request workflow records and follow up with team Signal and escalate (functionally or hierarchically) SLA breaches for request management-related Escalate and/or indicate a need for more training and/or technical and/organizational information Logs all relevant incident/service request details, allocating categorization and prioritization Provides the first-level investigation and diagnosis for user-based incidents and requests Escalates incidents/service requests they cannot resolve within agreed-upon timescales Conducts customer/user satisfaction callbacks/surveys as agreed upon them of impending changes or agreed-upon outages, etc. categorization, classification, and prioritization codes balancing workloads and skill sets Close fulfilled requests as required and notify them of impending changes or agreed-upon outages, etc. tools designed manager, if required members issues The service desk: Analyze requests and assign jobs to individuals codes Resolves those incidents/service requests they are able to Keeps users informed of the progress Communicates with users keeping them informed of the incident/request progress, notifying

Chapter 7: Request Management 136 Request Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Request response and fulfillment meet the agreed-upon targets. KPIs: The percentage of requests meeting the agreed-upon targets: The number of requests meeting the target by type The number of total requests by type The percentage of requests with defined targets: The number of requests without targets The number of requests with targets The percentage increase in the level of end-user satisfaction with the handling of requests (as measured in some form of satisfaction or end-user experience survey) The percentage reduction in the size of the current backlog of outstanding requests The percentage reduction in the total number of incidents related to request fulfillment activities CSF: End-user requests are managed in an efficient and effective manner as documented in the service catalog and/or service level agreements. KPIs: The percentage reduction of the average request fulfillment time for handling each type The increased number and percentage of requests fulfilled through automation without The percentage increase in the number of requests completed within agreed-upon target of request the need for manual intervention The percentage reduction in unplanned work in request fulfillment The percentage reduction of requests escalated to management The increased percentage of requests fulfilled by service desk times CSF: Requests should be validated against entitlement and authorization requirements. KPIS: The percentage increase of requests fulfilled that were appropriately authorized The percentage reduction of incidents related to security threats from request fulfillment The percentage reduction of requests initiated by end-users contacting support teams activities directly

Chapter 7: Request Management 137 Request Management: Integrations Process integrations are essential for ensuring the efficiency and quality of IT service management. Key integrations with request management include change management and service catalog management. The process integration between request management and change management is needed to ensure that any service request that involves a change to the IT infrastructure is properly assessed, authorized, and implemented according to the change management policy. For example, if a user requests a new software application, the request management process should check if the software is already in the service catalog, and if not, initiate a change request to the change management process. The change management process should then evaluate the impact, risk, and cost of the change, and approve or reject it accordingly. If approved, the change management process should coordinate the implementation of the change and update the service component repository with the new software. The request management process should then inform the user of the outcome of the request and close it: Change management The processes will collaborate regarding the definition and understanding of differences in scope Change management will inform and collaborate with request management when defining and approving standard changes that will be requested through request management. Request management will forward requests that are changes either in error or as the appropriate Request management will report on the number of changes submitted in error as requests. Request management will raise RFCs to update or improve standard changes in the request between requests and changes. way for a customer to access change management. process when inefficient or ineffective change procedures are identified. Service catalog management The process integration between request management and service catalog management is needed to ensure any service request that matches an existing service in the service catalog is fulfilled according to the predefined service level agreements (SLAS). For example, if a user requests access to a network service, the request management process should verify if the user is eligible for the service, and if sO, forward the request to the service catalog management process. The service catalog management process should then provision the service to the user according to the SLA and update the service component repository with the new service relationship. The request management process should then confirm the Request management and the request catalog are integrated with service catalog management in the delivery of the service to the user and close the request. following ways: Request management enables users to submit, track, and fulfill requests for standard services that The request catalog is a subset of the service catalog that contains only the services that can be Service catalog management ensures the service catalog is accurate, consistent, and aligned with are predefined in the service catalog. requested by users through a self-service portal or a service desk. the current and future needs of the business and its customers.

Chapter 7: Request Management 138 Request management will provide information. relating to request initiation, entitlement, and Request management will provide the workflow automation processes related to standard end requirements for inclusion in the service catalog. user requests for inclusion in the service catalog. Additional integrations include: Service level management (SLM): SLM will provide service level requirement and fulfillment targets related to requests identified Request management will provide performance information related to standard request in the SLA for request management to develop the necessary request models. fulfillment for SLA reporting and reviews. Business relationship management: Request management will provide information on the number and nature of requests and trends Provides a customer perspective on the requests'realization experience, performance and quality Provides business/customer input into satisfaction related to the request management process Request management redirects requests that are actually incidents to incident management. Request management notifies incident management of incidents triggered when executing Incident management redirects incidents that are requests (such as access requests) to request Incident management may use one or more requests in the request catalog to resolve an incident, over agreed-upon periods of time per customer group. Incident management: requests. management. such as requesting the resetting of passwords for user accounts. Continuous improvement: Provides support for continuousi improvement opportunities for the request management process Provides data related to improvement opportunities for the products and services that come into Provides data related to improvement opportunities for request management request management in the form of compliments, complaints, and feedback Problem management: Request management will inform problem management of trends in request failures that may Request management will provide information. and request records to assist problem Problem management will inform request management about ongoing problem investigations Problem management will collaborate with request management for adding workarounds to the indicate the existence of a problem. management with trend analysis and root cause analysis activities. involving or impacting requests. knowledge base and implementing problem solutions that are request types.

Chapter 7: Request Management 139 Request Management: Enablers Tools and technology are the software and hardware systems that enable the service request management process to function effectively. They include ticketing systems, service catalogs, self-service portals, automation tools, communication platforms, reporting tools, and more. These tools and technology help to capture, track, prioritize, assign, resolve, and close service requests, as well as monitor The ITSM tool provides a portal to enable users to access the request catalog. This may also be The ITSM tool also enables standard requests to be automated (ideally, from submission. to closure); e.g., The ITSM tool tracks the end-to-end fulfillment (progress) of requests, actions/decalonssystem tasks, and measure process performance and customer satisfaction. accomplished through an integrated service catalog portal. client software installation. and the provision of virtual servers. and provides automated updates to users. Additional technologies that support this process include: The ITSM tool enables request models to be defined and managed The ITSM tool automatically ensures or facilitates that all the request prerequisites and end-user eligibilities are checked during the request categorization; e.g., missing information or paperwork The ITSM tool enables selected requests to be viewed by authorized end-users only; e.g. based Resources are the people and assets that are involved in the service request management process. They include service desk agents, technicians, managers, customers, vendors, and other stakeholders. Resources also include the budget, time, skills, knowledge, and training that are required to execute the process. Resources help to deliver the service requests according to the agreed-upon service level Process documentation is the set of documents that define and describe the service request management process. It includes policies, procedures, guidelines, templates, forms, checklists, workflows, diagrams, roles and responsibilities, metrics, and more. Process documentation helps to standardize and streamline the process execution, as well as ensure compliance with internal and external regulations. on different levels of service offerings or by user group/Polertertory/ctec agreements (SLAs) and quality standards.

Chapter 8: Problem Management Problem Management: Purpose and Objectives Problem management is the process of identifying, analyzing, and resolving the root causes of recurring or potential incidents that affect the performance or availability of IT services. Problem management aims to prevent incidents from happening again or to minimize their impact if they do occur. The effective adoption of problem management activities should result in a decrease of the number of incidents by creating permanent solutions for known problems in the business technology environment and/or provide incident management knowledge records and information to reduce the time to restore Purpose: To identify, remove, and/or mitigate the cause or contributing factors of service disruption Problem management is a process that aims to find and eliminate the root causes of service disruptions service. or potential incidents. The main objectives of problem management are: To prevent or minimize the impact of service interruptions on business productivity and To provide workarounds or temporary fixes for unresolved problems until permanent solutions customer satisfaction are implemented By adopting problem management, the business can benefit from: Improved service quality and availability Enhanced customer loyalty and trust Reduced costs and risks associated with service failures and downtime An increased efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery and support The problem management process has both reactive and proactive aspects. The reactive aspect is concerned with solving problems in response to one or more incidents. Proactive problem management focuses on the prevention of incidents by identifying and addressing problems and risks before they have an impact on business goals.

Chapter 8: Problem Management Reactive problem management: 141 Supports the service desk and incident management in resolving incidents and restoring service within service level expectations Identifies problems that are causing repeat incidents Ensures problems are fully recorded in a problem management system Communicates known problems to key stakeholders Prioritizes problems with the involvement of support teams Manages and improves knowledge articles and workarounds to support the goal of minimizing the incident's impact Proactive problem management: Identifies incident trends Develops and maintains problem management procedures Gathers information from sources such as project management, software development, and security management regarding known defects, risks, and/or vulnerabilities that may cause Captures information from third-party vendors regarding known vulnerabilities Initiates changes to prevent the occurrence of avoidable incidents and the recurrence of incidents Prevents problems in one system or service being replicated in others incidents Benefits of problem management Problem management delivers important benefits: Incident volume reduction: As the underlying causes of incidents are removed, the risk of recurring incidents impacting business operations will be reduced. Proactive problem Improved organizational learning: By recording problems, workarounds, and their definitive solutions, the knowledge built up within the organization will not depend upon individuals. Improved communication: Progress with problem analysis and solutioning will support capabilities such as business relationship management when informing customers about the management will prevent incidents from occurring in the first place. Better service quality from a customer's perspective status of the problem related to reported incidents. A visible improvement in service provision An increased availability of services An increased chance of achieving SLA availability targets Improved user productivity Improved relationships between IT and the business Learning from past experiences A reduced chance of invoking a contingency plan Improved productivity by support staff An improved IT reputation Improved morale Additional benefits could include:

Chapter 8: Problem Management 142 A1 better understanding of service problems Improved management information. A greater control of IT services Problem Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"to "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement The reason for the policy Benefits Use of subject matter experts This policy defines how and Service provider functions with when to involve experts from Helps define the skill requirements to perform a root cause analysis Improved time to identify the root cause A focus on identifying the root cause versus restoring service different domains or functions to assist with problem analysis and resolution. specific subject matter expertise will be assigned to conduct root cause analysis activities. that a subject matter expert a problem is classified as a high priority or as complex. Business prioritization All problems will be prioritized from a business perspective based upon the impact and urgency defined in the priority model that has been defined for incident, problem, and change management. For example, a policy may state To ensure the appropriate should be consulted whenever work on a problem diagnosis resource(s) are assigned to This policy determines how to prioritize problems based on their impact and urgency for the business. For example, a policy may establish a scoring system that assigns weights to different factors such as customer satisfaction, revenue loss, regulatory compliance, Ensure the right problems are being worked on in the right order Improved resource utilization An improved decision making capability Improved management reporting etc. 10 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 8: Problem Management Policy statement Root cause analysis use structured root cause analysis techniques for a more effective diagnosis. For example, a policy may require that a root cause analysis report should be completed and reviewed for every major problem within a certain time frame. Permanent fixes Candidates for permanent fixes or solutions to known problems should be managed through normal transition processes such as service assurance and testing, release and deployment, and change management. For example, a policy may mandate that a permanent fix should be tested and verified before deployment and that it should be documented and communicated to relevant 143 The reason for the policy This policy specifies the methods and tools that should underlying causes of problems and incidents. Benefits To ensure that problem management doesn't become an extension of the incident management approach Subject matter experts should be used to identify the This policy outlines the criteria and procedures for implementing permanent solutions that eliminate or mitigate the causes of problems. Ensures that proposed permanent fixes or solutions are validated, tested, and approved before implementation. Reduces the risk of unauthorized changes to existing services and service components parties.

Chapter 8: Problem Management Policy statement Integration with change management Decisions to resolve a problem through raising a request for change should be based on the cost to implement that change versus the cost and impact to the organization if the problem is left unresolved. Any decision to refrain from resolving a problem should be documented and communicated to the appropriate stakeholders. Provide workarounds Problem management will review, categorize, and update workarounds that have been submitted by incident management and other processes or functional groups. Problem identification Problem management will periodically attempt to correlate open incidents to known or defined problems. During the problem identification and logging activity, problem management will also attempt to match the single or multiple incidents to existing known or defined problems. 144 The reason for the policy To ensure that proper financial decisions are applied to the problem management process Benefits Improved financial and resource utilization Improved decision-making Clarity on the intended and unintended possibly consequences for stakeholders To ensure that the defined workarounds are feasible, are in the best interest of the business, and are validated and populated in the problem management database To ensure that proper information. is being input into problem tickets for correlation by the incident management Fewer incidents caused by poor workarounds Improved service/system availability Proper resources/skill sets are utilized to validate the workaround. Improved matching of incidents A reduced number of: new problems that have to be recorded An improved understanding of the impact of incidents Better resource utilization process

Chapter 8: Problem Management Policy statement Establish clear and agreed upon criteria to identify and raise a problem: Multiple incidents showing the same symptoms where the cause is unknown or 145 The reason for the policy A clear definition of problem criteria will limit the scope of problem management and ensure the appropriate energy and time are allocated to actual Benefits Consistent criteria for defining and raising problems An improved use of resources to investigate problems that truly matter to the organization problems. Where a single significant incident has been identified If the monitoring solution identifies a specific type of event, the ## of times within a ## time frame to create a problem record Consistent problem management approach One problem management approach based on ITSM best practices will be utilized throughout the organization. Improved transparency and communication of known issues and problems There will be only one tool or tool suite used for logging and tracking problems and known Improved communication Each internal stakeholder group or external service provider who works on a problem will be responsible for updating the problem ticket on an ongoing basis. or Provide effectiveness and efficiency in performing problem management activities Improved data collection Improved management information Improved resource utilization To provide effectiveness and efficiency to the problem management process Improved data collection Improved management information An improved decision making capability issues. To ensure the proper collection of the work generated as well as provide the ability to properly communicate the status of the problem Improved communication An ongoing record of actions taken and the status of the problem Improved and more accurate management reporting

Chapter 8: Problem Management 146 Problem Management: Terms and Definitions Problem: A problem is defined as an unknown underlying cause or set of causal factors that can lead to one or more incidents. This definition supports the problem management process by providing a clear and consistent way of identifying, analyzing, and resolving problems in an IT environment. For example, a problem could be a faulty network device that causes intermittent connectivity issues for users. By following the problem management process, the IT team can investigate the root cause of the problem, find a workaround or a permanent solution, and prevent future incidents from occurring. Root cause: The contributing or causal factors underlying the service disruption or reduction Root cause analysis (RCA): causes of problems Incident correlation: Workaround: A collective term that describes a wide range of approaches, tools, and techniques used to uncover the An approach used to match and group incidents with common characteristics A temporary approach and/or set of instructions/activitics to undertake to either restore service or mitigate and reduce the service impact when a permanent solution is not available Prioritization: Prioritization in problem management is often slightly different from incident management because it uses the impact and the probability of recurrence to determine the priority level. Problem Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events: A1 risk to the business as a result of current or potential incidents An improvement opportunity Triggering events of the problem management process include a risk to the business as a result of current or potential incidents and can also include improvement opportunities. This means that whenever there is a threat to the normal operation or performance of the business due to an incident that has occurred or may occur, or whenever there is a chance to improve and enhance the quality or efficiency of the business processes, the problem management process is initiated. The problem management process aims to identify, analyze, resolve, and prevent problems that affect the business services and products. By doing so, the problem management process helps to reduce the impact and frequency of incidents, improve customer satisfaction and loyalty, and optimize the use of resources and costs.

Chapter 8: Problem Management Problem management inputs Key inputs to problem management: 147 Incident records and details: These provide information about the symptoms, impact, and frequency of the problems, as well as the workarounds or solutions that have been applied. Application defects: These are errors or bugs in the software applications that may cause Business cost-benefit analysis results: These show the financial implications of the problems and their solutions such as the costs of downtime, lost revenue, customer satisfaction, etc. The business risk analysis and prioritizing for problem resolution: This determines the urgency and importance of solving the problems based on their potential impact on the business objectives Root cause analysis techniques: These are methods or tools that help identify the underlying Configuration records and details: These contain information about the service components that are involved in the problems such as their attributes, dependencies, status, etc. Policies: These are the rules or guidelines that govern the problem management process such as roles and responsibilities, escalation procedures, reporting requirements, etc. problems or incidents. and operations. causes of the problems and their relationships. Triggering events Inputs Ariskt to business as a result of current or potential incidents Ani improvement opportunity Incident records and details Application defects Business cost-benefit analysis results The business risk analysis and priorityf for problem resolution Root cause: analysis techniques Configurationrecords and details Policies Other? Figure 15: Problem management triggering events and inputs

Chapter 8: Problem Management 148 Problem Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: A mitigated business risk A solved problem An actioned improvement opportunity A mitigated business risk, a solved problem, and an actioned improvement opportunity are terminating events of the problem management process because they indicate the root cause of the problem has been identified and resolved and that the impact of the problem on the business has been minimized or eliminated. These events also mark the completion of the problem management life cycle. By reaching these terminating events, the problem management process ensures the problem is effectively handled and that the lessons learned from the problem are documented and communicated. Problem management outputs: A temporary or permanent solution is an output of the problem management process when the An updated problem record is an output of the problem management process when the status, Improvement opportunities are outputs of the problem management process when the analysis of problems reveals potential areas for enhancing the quality, efficiency, or effectiveness of IT A change request is an output of the problem management process when a solution to a problem Knowledge is an output of the problem management process when the information. and experience gained from dealing with problems are captured and shared with relevant root cause of a problem is identified and resolved. progress, and details of a problem are documented and communicated. services or processes. requires a modification to the IT infrastructure or configuration. stakeholders. Terminating event Outputs Ar mitigated business risk As solved problem An actioned improvement opportunity At temporary/permanent solution An updated problem record Improvement opportunities A change request Knowledge Figure 16: Problem management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 8: Problem Management 149 Problem Management: Themes and Activities the problem manager and the problem management team: The process themes for problem management are the main areas that guide the actions and decisions of The problem life cycle: This theme covers the stages of identifying, logging, categorizing, investigating, resolving, and closing problems. The problem life cycle also includes monitoring and reporting on the status and performance of problem management, as well as conducting reviews and audits to identify Business analysis: This theme involves understanding the impact of problems on the business goals, processes, and services, as well as the needs and expectations of the stakeholders. Business analysis helps to prioritize problems, define requirements for solutions, and evaluate the benefits and risks of different The application of a solution: This theme focuses on implementing the agreed-upon solution for a problem either by applying a workaround or a permanent fix. The application of the solution also involves testing, verifying, documenting, and communicating the solution to the relevant parties, as well The problem management life cycle activities may be broken down into two high-level phases: 1. Problem identification and analysis (identifying, logging, categorizing, investigating) improvement opportunities. options. as ensuring the solution does not cause any adverse effects or new problems. A problem condition identified from multiple incidents that exhibit common symptoms or from a single significant (high-impact, priority 1 or 2) incident is indicative of a single service outage for which the cause is unknown, and the risk of continued recurring incidents impacting the business, customer, and/or larger organization is high. The main activities of problem identification and analysis are: The identification and logging (creating the problem record, using data from the incident record(s)); consider priority allocation, classification matching, trend analysis, and a unique The allocation of resources (problem management group and support teams); consider the An investigation and diagnosis that establishes which service components are the cause of the identifier The classification based on categorization and impact (high, medium, and low) expertise, location, and volume of work incident/problem 2. Causal factor identification, resolving, and closure (resolving and closing problems) The removal, replacement, or repair of the service components that caused the incident/problem and led to the degradation of the agreed-upon level of service by means of changes to the infrastructure The main activities of resolving and closing are: Resolution and repair (via the change management process) Communication (to other service management process) Closure (after the successful change and the RFC is signed off) Monitoring the change's progress (with change management and support teams)

Chapter 8: Problem Management Management information: 150 Metrics that measure the effectiveness of the problem management process incidents/problems, downtime, and the number of repeat problems) Postmortemylessons learned; review reports for problems indicating measurements of the effectiveness of the IT service provision (fix times, outstanding incidents, cleared Root cause analysis methods A key focus of problem management is the identification, resolution, and closure of problems. The key skill related to this task is described as analysis: Analysis or convergent thinking is focused on the ability to look at a complex concept or object and break it down into its constituent parts for the purpose of understanding, managing, and improving. To support the skill and application of analysis, organizations may use a variety of structured problem Events and causal factor analysis (ECFA) is a graphical technique that helps to visualize the sequence of A simple IT example of using ECFA for RCA is as follows: Suppose a web server crashes and causes downtime for a website. The ECFA chart would start with the initial event, which is the web server crash, and then trace back the possible causes and contributing factors that preceded it. For example, a web server crash could be caused by a hardware failure that could be due to a power surge, which could be related to a storm, and SO on. The ECFA chart would also show the effects and consequences of each event and factor such as data loss, customer dissatisfaction, revenue. loss, etc. The ECFA chart would help to identify the root cause of the problem, which is the most fundamental reason why the web server crashed, and also suggest corrective actions to prevent or mitigate similar problems in the future. Change analysis: A change analysis involves comparing the system before and after the problem occurred to find out what changed. A simple IT example of change analysis is troubleshooting a network solving methods such as: events and factors that led to an undesired outcome. outage. Take these steps: Define the problem: The network is down, and users cannot access the internet. Establish the timeline: The network was working fine until 10:00 am when it suddenly stopped. Identify the changes: The IT team checks the network devices and finds out that a router was Analyze the changes: The IT team inspects the router configuration and discovers the new router has a different IP address than the old one, which causes a conflict with the firewall rules. Implement corrective actions: The IT team changes the router IP address to match the old one and Verify the solution: The IT team tests the network connectivity and confirms the problem is replaced at 9:45 am by a new technician. updates the firewall rules accordingly. resolved.

Chapter 8: Problem Management 151 Barrier analysis: A barrier analysis involves examining the barriers that prevent or mitigate the consequences of an undesired event. For example, suppose an IT system crashes due to a power outage. The barriers that could have prevented or reduced the impact of the crash are the backup power supply, data backup, system recovery plan, etc. Barrier analysis helps to evaluate the effectiveness and reliability of these barriers and to identify any gaps or weaknesses that need to be addressed. By improving the 5 Whys Analysis: The 5 Whys involves asking "why" repeatedly until the root cause is found. Here is a barriers, the IT system can be more resilient and less prone to failure. simple IT example of using the 5 Whys: Problem: The website is not loading. Why? The server is down. Why? The server ran out of disk space. Why? The server was not configured to delete old log files. Why? The server administrator did not follow the best practices for) log management. Why? The server administrator was not trained properly on log management. Root cause: The server administrator was not trained properly on log management The following table represents an example of the detailed set of activities for problem management. Activity cycle: Problem identification Description The problem life Identify problems from the following activities: Incident correlation Trend analyses Major incident management Proactive problem identification sources Review problem alerts raised by incident management and other All relevant information relating to the nature of the problem must be logged SO that a full historical record is maintained. At a minimum, the following processes details are input during problem logging: A unique reference number The date/time recorded A cross-reference to related incidents User details Service details Service component details Priority and categorization details A description of the incident symptoms that resulted in the problem's Details of the diagnostics or attempted recovery actions taken identification

Chapter 8: Problem Management 152 Activity The problem life cycle: Problem logging categorization and prioritization Description for incidents Properly categorize and prioritize the problem SO it enhances management reporting; use the same categorization structure for problems that are used Problems should be prioritized using the same priority matrices for impact and urgency that are used for incidents. However, the problem category and priority may be different from the related incident(s). Prioritization provides the order for working on problems. Business analysis: Properly investigate, diagnose, test, and verify the root cause of the problem and determine the associated service components. This activity is typically assigned to the appropriate subject matter expert (SME) group(s). The investigation and diagnosis is typically referred to as the root cause analysis (RCA). A logical and creative analysis, diagnosis, and problem solving techniques should be used to facilitate finding the root cause. discovered, and a workaround or permanent fix has been identified, the knowledge about this information should be recorded. Depending on the tools used, raising a known problem or issue record may be equivalent to changing the status of a problem record from the investigation to the root Note: In the situation where a vendor has provided information about a known vulnerability related to a service component, a problem record may Policies often define the criteria for the creation of a problem record. Known problems generally have more mature workarounds and are therefore Root cause investigation and diagnosis Business analysis: Once the root cause has been determined, the service component has been Document casual factors and potential root causes cause identified. be created without having experienced an incident. preferred by incident management. The application of Existing workarounds should be identified and assessed as possible a solution: Workaround considerations resolutions for incidents related to the problem. This activity will also define new workaround(s), if feasible, to take the place of existing workaround(s) or The knowledge database can be searched to match the problem against any to define a workaround if one does not exist. known issues and possible workarounds.

Chapter 8: Problem Management 153 Activity a solution: Resolving and solution determination Description The application of The identification of a permanent solution and/or a set of alternative options through a solutioning exercise involving the appropriate stakeholders and The solution may involve a resolution and repair (via the change management process) and/or the adoption of using a common workaround. In some cases, the cost and/or impact of resolving the problem cannot be justified. In that case, a decision may be made NOT to submit any RFCs but to leave the problem open and continue to resolve subsequent incidents subject matter expert (SME) group(s) using a validated workaround. The application of As soon as an acceptable resolution is found, it should be applied to resolve a solution: Submit a request for change; apply resolution. The problem life cycle: Closure the problem. When the resolution justifies a change, this will lead to the initiation of an RFC and approval through the change management process before the The problems will be closed after the successful implementation and a post resolution can be applied. implementation review (PIR). Problem Management: Actors and Roles stakeholder groups and roles need to be involved. For the problem management process to work effectively, a number of process actors and key The following actors have different roles and responsibilities in this process: Customer(s): This is the person or group that uses or benefits from the IT services that are affected by problems. The customer reports incidents, provides feedback, and participates in a root cause The product or service owner: This is the person who is responsible for the quality, performance, and availability of a specific IT product or service that is involved in a problem. The product or service owner coordinates with the support teams and the problem coordinator to identify and The problem coordinator: This is the person who facilitates and coordinates the problem management process across the organization. The problem coordinator identifies, records, classifies, prioritizes, assigns, monitors, and communicates problems and their status. The problem coordinator also leads the problem investigation and analysis and ensures problems are analysis and the problem resolution. resolve problems related to their product or service. resolved within the agreed-upon time frames and to quality standards.

Chapter 8: Problem Management 154 Support teams: These are groups of technical experts who provide support for the IT products and services that are affected by problems. The support teams perform troubleshooting, diagnosis, resolution, and prevention activities for problems within their scope of expertise and All the processes include the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include: In addition to the generic manager role, the problem manager also has key responsibilities to: authority. The problem manager Collaborate with subject matter resolution groups to enable the removal or mitigation of problems Collaborate and coordinate with third-party vendors to fulfill and/or improve their contractual obligations with regards to resolving problems and providing problem-related information and Maintain and manage knowledge articles and workarounds related to known issues Attend change control board (CCB) meetings concerning problem requests for change (RFC) data Problem management analyst/coordinators In addition to the generic analyst/coordinator role, the role also has key responsibilities to: Allocate analysis and solutioning activities to the appropriate subject matter expert within a department or section support group Perform a trend analysis Review and evaluate closed problems Coordinate and plan the problem resolution as required Coordinate and monitor the problem resolution for vendor-maintained products Help the problem management manager build the business case for an enhancement request Engage with peer analysts to keep an up-to-date view of their activities Attend meetings with the problem management process manager and other problem Communicate changes to the problem management process within departments and promote the Regardless of the role title, every problem and known issue must have an assigned responsibility the person or team that will regularly review a problem or known issue in a monitoring state, who will Perform and coordinate proactive problem management management analysts use of the changed process communicate appropriately, and who will lead the work effort.

Chapter 8: Problem Management 155 Problem Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Reduce the impact ofi incidents and problems on the business. KPIs: An increase in the percentage of major incidents with root cause identified A decrease in the number of incidents by resolution category A decrease from baseline in the number of incidents by resolution category An increase in the percentage of problems that have a workaround identified An increase in the number of updates produced in the knowledge base A reduction of the time to implement fixes to known issues A1 reduction in the average time to resolve problems A reduction of the time to diagnose problems A1 reduction of the average number of undiagnosed problems CSF: Identify and detect problems. KPIs: An increase in the number of new problem records generated An increase in the number of problems found as a result of trending An increase in the number of incident records linked to the problem records A reduction in the number of open problems by time period CSF: Effectively identify root causes. KPIs: An increase in the number of problems with a root cause identified An increase in the number of requests for a change initiated to remove problems A1 reduction in the number of problems with an unidentified root cause A reduction in the number of problems with the status of monitoring CSF: Required knowledge is shared. KPIs: An increase in the number of knowledge articles and workarounds published An increase in the number of incidents resolved based on using published workarounds

Chapter 8: Problem Management 156 Problem Management: Integrations As each process is designed, it is important to recognize there are key integrations between processes. Even if the goal is not to reach integration, there is a certain level of integration (inputs become outputs) Problem management is the process of identifying, analyzing, and resolving the root causes of recurring incidents and/or major and significant incidents that affect IT services. Incident management is the process of restoring normal service operations as quickly as possible after an incident occurs. Problem that naturally takes place. management and incident management are integrated through the following steps: Problem management records and categorizes problems based on the incidents reported by Problem management analyzes the problems and identifies the underlying causes using various techniques such as a root cause analysis, Pareto analysis, or fault tree analysis. Problem management communicates with incident management to provide workarounds or Problem management coordinates with incident management to monitor the effectiveness of the Problem management updates incident management on the status and progress of problem Problem management is also closely related to change management, which is the process of controlling and implementing changes to IT services and infrastructure. Problem management and change incident management. temporary solutions for the problems until they are resolved. workarounds and the impact of the problems on the service levels. resolution and closure. management are integrated through the following steps: Problem management identifies and evaluates the potential changes that are required to resolve Problem management submits change requests to change management for the approval and Problem management communicates with change management to ensure the changes are Problem management verifies the changes have resolved or prevented the problems and reports Problem management updates change management on the outcome and closure of problem or prevent problems. scheduling of the changes. implemented according to the agreed-upon plan and procedures. any: issues or risks to change management. resolution and prevention.

Chapter 8: Problem Management Additional integrations include: 157 Release and deployment management (RDM): Problem management will inform RDM of any process and/or deployment tool errors discovered during RCA activities and will collaborate with RDM to determine the appropriate problem Problem management will collaborate with release and deployment for the elimination of known RDM provides information. to incident and problem management regarding any known defects RDM will oversee the planning and execution of problem requested releases and deployments. Problem management will inform request management of ongoing problem investigations or Problem management will collaborate with request management for adding workarounds to the Request management will provide information and request records to assist problem Request management will inform problem management about trends in request failures that may solutions. issues associated with a release. or errors and potential workarounds that are part of a release. Request management: known issues involving or impacting requests. knowledge base and implementing problem solutions that are request types. management with trend analyses and root cause analysis activities. indicate the existence of a problem. Configuration management: Problem management will associate problem records to all related service components in the Problem management will provide information updates to configuration management when errors or missing information related to configuration management is discovered during problem Configuration management will provide problem management with access to the configuration management system to conduct point-in-time problem root cause investigations and analyses, as well as to conduct risk assessments and determine solutions for the root cause service component repository and configuration management system. management activities. elimination/mitigation

Chapter 8: Problem Management IT asset management (ITAM): 158 Problem management provides information used to assess IT asset performance and value. Problem management provides ITAM with information related to IT asset performance and problems that are inputs to IT asset operations and long-term planning decisions. Problem management provides information updates to the IT asset repository. Problem management may identify and notify ITAM about lost or stolen IT assets. ITAM provides information within the IT asset repository to support problem management root ITAM provides information. within the IT asset repository to support and assist with problem IT asset: management provides policies for inclusion of IT asset management activities in problem cause analysis (RCA) and other problem activities. management: S assessment of the appropriate problem solution. management. Service level management (SLM): Problem management will provide SLM status updates and the outcomes of RCA activities, will collaborate with SLM to determine: appropriate solutions, and will providel updates and outcomes Problem management will inform service level management of the status and resolution of Problem management will provide problems and known issues related to services as input for SLM will provide problem management with service levels parameters from service level and operational agreements and contracts to establish the problem record priority based on impact SLM will request that a problem is opened for service improvement plans that require a problem for solutions requiring RFCs. problems and known issues affecting service levels. service level reviews and service improvement plans. and urgency. management investigation. Business relationship management (BRM): Problem management provides status updates and progress information to BRM for BRM provides customer and user feedback and information. to assist with root cause analysis BRM works with customer and product/service owners to identify trends regarding service communication to customers and users. activities and the problem solution assessment. quality, cost, and performance requirements that identify problems.

Chapter 8: Problem Management 159 Problem Management: Enablers Enablers are essential components of any business process because they help to optimize the performance and outcomes of the process. In problem management, enablers are the factors or elements that support or facilitate the identification, analysis, resolution, and prevention of problems that affect the delivery of IT services. These are numerous common enablers for problem management: Tools and technology: These are the software applications, hardware devices, or systems that enable problem management activities such as problem detection, logging, tracking, analysis, reporting, and communication. Examples of tools and technology for problem management are incident management systems, root cause analysis tools, knowledge management systems, service level management systems, and collaboration platforms. Examples of technology requirements: The ITSM tool allows the creation of separate records for problems and incidents. The ITSM tool enables a problem record to be related to one or more incident records. The ITSM tool supports the statistical analysis, impact analysis, and trend analysis of past incidents to identify incidents with possible common causes or other correlations. The ITSM tool facilitates the automated correlation of incidents to problems records. The ITSM tool integrates with or facilitates monitoring and alerting tools to proactively identify potential problems, such as when a monitoring solution identifies a specific type of event numerous times within a specific time frame  at which time a problem record is The ITSM tool enables problem management to capture, categorize, manage, and publish Resources: These are the human, financial, or physical assets that are required for problem management such as staff, budget, equipment, or facilities. Resources for problem management include problem managers, problem analysts, subject matter experts, service owners, service providers, and customers. Resources also include the time and money allocated for problem Process documentation: This is the set of documents that define and describe the problem management process such as policies, procedures, roles and responsibilities, workflows, templates, forms, checklists, metrics, and guidelines. Process documentation for problem management helps to establish a common understanding of the process objectives, scope, inputs, outputs, activities, tasks, roles, and responsibilities. Process documentation also helps to ensure consistency, standardization, compliance, and quality in problem management. created. knowledge articdles/workarounds to support incident management. management activities and initiatives. Other potential enablers of problem management: Culture: This is the set of values, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors that influence how people approach and perform problem management. A positive culture for problem management fosters a proactive mindset, a collaborative spirit, a learning orientation, a customer focus, and a continuous improvement attitude among the stakeholders involved in problem management.

Chapter 8: Problem Management 160 Governance: This is the framework that defines and controls how problem management is planned, organized, implemented, monitored, evaluated, and improved. Governance for problem management includes the establishment of clear roles and responsibilities, the alignment of problem management with organizational goals and strategies, the definition of performance indicators and targets, the implementation of quality assurance and audit mechanisms, and the Training: This is the process of developing and enhancing the knowledge, skills, and competencies of the people involved in problem management. Training for problem management includes providing formal education or certification programs, conducting workshops or seminars, offering coaching or mentoring sessions, or facilitating self-learning or peer-learning opportunities. Training helps to improve the capability and confidence of the problem provision of feedback and recognition mechanisms. management staff and stakeholders.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management Knowledge Management: Purpose and Objectives Knowledge management (KM) has many focus areas based on its use and context within IT service management. It is not just about creating artifacts, documents, and content  its primary focus is the effective and efficient delivery of services and facilitating business value. Its supports that goal by enabling the improvement of the capabilities, attitudes, and culture of a service organization and its people. KM intentionally seeks to improve the organization's ability to work and deliver on its mission goals by enabling and improving the knowledge of individuals and teams to effectively and efficiently execute process activities and make accurate information available for timely decisions based on context. Purpose: The purpose of knowledge management is to capture, structure, communicate, maintain, and improve relevant data and information. to support organizational knowledge in its application to Knowledge management is the ITSM process responsible for publishing accurate perspectives, ideas, and information and for ensuring that these are available in the right place and at the right time to the appropriate audiences. The knowledge management process enables informed decisions and improves Effective knowledge management enables ITSM-related roles to employ their knowledge, their ability to remember and apply knowledge, and their ability to contribute to the intellectual property of an As automation, artificial intelligence, and robotics take over many of the manual and repeatable tasks, it is necessary to find ways to create, synthesize, package, and disseminate information with appropriate In the context of ITSM, the following list provides several examples where effective and efficient Support: Effective and efficient knowledge supported by accurate and accessible information. enables IT professionals to support the purpose and goals of the service desk, incident management, and problem management processes to both recover from service disruptions and to identify how to reduce or facilitate decision-making. efficiency by reducing the need to rediscover knowledge. organization. context, security, and availability to support the goals of the organization. knowledge management supports ITSM processes and governance decision-making. eliminate the negative impacts of future incidents.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 162 Delivery: Shared knowledge of both the service provider and the customer enables the organization to effectively deliver and measure service delivery outcomes related to services documented in the service catalog, measured by service level management, supported by the service desk, and requested through Change and release: Organizational knowledge of relationships, dependencies, and regulatory requirements is enabled by configuration management, IT asset management, service level management, and vendor management. This information can then be appropriately used to support the knowledge of IT professionals engaged in validation and testing, change management, and release management to ensure there's an appropriately managed approach to scheduling as well as approving changes to Leadership, governance, and performance management: Leadership's knowledge of strategy, governance decisions, agreements, and targets are critical outputs captured within knowledge management to support processes such as vendor management, service level management, and request management. production services. performance and improvement management. Data, Information, Knowledge, and Wisdom (DIKW) Raw data and event information without context is of little value. For organizational knowledge to be used effectively, it requires structure and contextualization. A popular model to describe the translation of data and information to knowledge applied to wisdom is known as the DIKW model. Consider this observation made by Neil Fleming as a basis for thoughts related to the following diagram: A collection of data is not information. A collection of information is not knowledge. A collection of knowledge is not wisdom. A collection of wisdom is not truth."1 Moving from Data to Decision-Making Why? Whati is best? How? Who? What? When? Where? Wisdom Knowledge Information Et 20) Doing things Data right! Doingt the rightt things! Figure 17: Pink Elephant Inc. Configuration Management Specialist Course. Burlington, ON, Canada: 2023. 11 Fleming, Neil D. "Coping with a Revolution: Will the Internet Change Learning?" Vark-learn.com. VARK. Accessed May 9, 2023. http.//vark-learn.cam.com/syp-contentupload.201408/Information and Knowle.pdf

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 163 According to Russell Ackoff, a systems theorist and professor of organizational change, the content of the human mind and, therefore, the practice of knowledge management can be classified into five categories:12 1. Data  raw numbers, symbols, characters that have no specific meaning provides answers to who, what, where, and when questions 2. Information  data that is contextualized or logically grouped to have meaning that can be useful; 3. Knowledge the application of data and information to strategy, planning, practice, method, or approach; answers how questions 4. Understanding an appreciation of why 5. Wisdom  This reflects the use ofl knowledge and understanding for decision, action, or in-action filtered through values, principles, insight, and ethics. Wisdom is the application of knowledge A knowledgebase (KB) or automated knowledge repository is really an informational source that can go no further than information. contextualization, retrieval, and sharing. The knowledge management process seeks to enable key stakeholders through the DIKW model to support the acquisition and the "Knowledgel is the meansl by which weinform and make decisions; iti isi not al higher order of information. 113 The objectives of the knowledge management (KM) process are to enable informed decisions and to improve the efficiency of the IT service organization by increasing the organizational capability and influenced by emotional intelligence. application of knowledge, understanding, and wisdom. Objectives reducing the effort and need to rediscover knowledge. Some of the objectives of KM are to: Improve the quality of decision-making; by ensuring reliable and secure knowledge, current Ensure knowledge management requirements are based on service and customer needs Maintain a knowledge base that provides controlled access to knowledge, information, and data that is appropriate for each audience and provides content and information to enable end-user Gather, analyze, store, share, use, and maintain knowledge, information, and data throughout Retain intellectual property and knowledge while reducing training time for new employees information, and data is available self-help the service provider organization and the service portfolio 12 Ackoff, Russell. "From Data to Wisdom. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, no. 16 (1989): 3-9. Accessed May 13 Snowden, David. "Knowledge Management." Cynefin.io. Last modified September 30, 2021. Accessed May 10, 10, 2023. hitps/faclty.ang-esdunfhxcumensDataviasdom.pdr 2023. https/cynefin.iohwiki/Knowledge management

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management Example benefits of knowledge management Benefits to the IT service providers: 164 Staff will have access to the best process to get things done effectively and efficiently. Demand capture and service delivery processes will be more effective with fewer mistakes. Improves the ability for IT service providers to'fix it right the first time Supports the ability for IT service providers to implement repeatable solutions Enables quality to be built into the service and system design Enables a reduction in support costs careers in other areas: Allows subject matter experts (SMES) to share/store their knowledge SO they may advance their An improved ramp-up or speed to competency for new staff Reduces single points of failure due to attrition or absences Enables informed decisions requiring less rework cycles Provides for a singular location to find key information Reduces duplicate data throughout the organization Benefits to the customers: Decreases the mean time to restore (MTTR) incidents and the delivery time of requests It reduces the costs and risks associated with service failures or errors. Improved user and customer satisfaction An improved quality of service of the IT organization More professional and accurate communication between the service provider and users on behalf

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 165 Knowledge Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"4 "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement One approach The reason for the policy Provide effectiveness and Benefits Consistency in policies and procedures related to knowledge management Improved information communication and relationships Improved data collection Improved management information Improved resource utilization Improved decision quality (speed and accuracy) Improved data collection Improved management information An improved decision making capability One knowledge management efficiency in performing approach based on ITSM best knowledge management practices will be utilized throughout the organization. activities in support of service management; ensures a consistent, repeatable knowledge management process Common tools There will be a shared set of knowledge management tools to log and track information and knowledge. Provide effectiveness and efficiency in performing knowledge management activities 14 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy. ." Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 166 Policy statement A standard approach All entries into the knowledge base (KB) must adhere to established content standards. Content standards specifically address how to categorize and state information. to create findable and usable KB entries. The reason for the policy Increases the likelihood that the data will be found and matched to similar issues when a search is performed Adherence to the standards also results in more usable Benefits Content standards help to preserve and keep the data in the KB clean. Standards increase the readability or clarity of the content (quality). Allows for the reuse of existing content or phrases resulting in less work and greater consistency (time) Creates a format in which KB users can be prompted with questions that will aid in the diagnosis of an issue; this is hugely beneficial, because the results presented change dynamically as more information. is added to the search, each time prompting the analyst with even more appropriate questions to ask or validate (time) Structure gives context to content (the ability to find and reuse). Feedback or other sources that require modifications to knowledge will enable knowledge management (KM) to easily identify an content. Ownership All knowledge within the KB requires an owner All knowledge shall have an identified owner for the identification of a responsible party owner.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 167 Policy statement Required resources Adequate resources for knowledge management activities such as training, tools, and employee engagement will be established. The reason for the policy By providing sufficient resources for knowledge management activities, the organization can foster a culture of learning and innovation, improve its performance and competitiveness, and reduce the risk of losing valuable knowledge due to staff turnover or other factors. Benefits It can improve the quality and efficiency of work processes by enabling employees to access and share relevant information and best practices. It can foster a culture of learning and innovation. by encouraging employees to acquire new skills and knowledge and to contribute to organizational knowledge assets. Even though a KB entry was not kdientifted/recognized, saving the work performed will either act as a seed for the creation of a new entry or improve the ability to find existing entries. Eliminates the throwaway of work performed Reduces rework Facilitates the improvement of existing KB entries SO they can be more easily found and recognized as relevant Immature content that is frequently used is flagged for review and accelerated completion. Analysts have access to accurate, timely, and complete information. Individuals closest to the work build the KB entries. Quality efforts focus on providing tangible benefits. Assess and measure queries Retain all information. related to a search when the search does not identify an existing KB entry that matches the search criteria. Capturing how people look for things helps in understanding their context. This insight needs to be preserved as content for a new KB entry, in the event one does not already exist. Saving unsuccessful search criteria will identify how and what previous analysts searched for and eliminate any throwaway work. The act of searching thus becomes the first stage of creation. Review for relevance and accuracy Ensure knowledge three-level quality control program: Just-in-time reviews Demand-driven reviews Random sampling The effective support of the ITSM processes depends on high-quality KB entries. A focused program of quality meet that objective. management quality through a review and improvement helps

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 168 Knowledge Management: Terms and Definitions Key definitions: The first and most important definition is that knowledge is what a person knows and understands; it is not Knowledge: Facts, information, and skills acquired by a person through experience or education; the ar recorded artifact or document. theoretical or practical understanding of a subject!5 Key concepts: Knowledge only exists in the minds of people. Only information (on this knowledge) can be stored and communicated. Communicated information. can be misinterpreted by the receiver. An organization's knowledge enables it to deliver on its mission goals. When information is communicated, knowledge is gained by both the transmitter and receiver of Misinterpretation stems from the difference in context and the biases of the communicating knowledge. parties. Knowledge base (KB): An online collection of information about a product, service, department, or topic Knowledge artifact (KA): A physical or digital entity that contains specific content created by people to be that stores information or answers to questions or solutions to problems. used/consumed by a stakeholder to support knowledge acquisition Examples Articles Data files, records Operations instructions FAQs Audio recordings Digital or physical documents Forms Books Audio recordings Webpages Videos Problem workarounds Information: Information is a term that can have different meanings depending on the context. In general, information. is any data or knowledge that can be communicated or processed by humans or machines. Information. can be represented in various forms such as text, images, sounds, numbers, and symbols. Information. can also be classified into different types such as factual, subjective, objective, qualitative, and quantitative. Information, can be used for various purposes such as learning, decision making, and problem-solving. 15 "Knowledge."  Oxfordlearersdictionaries.com. Accessed May 10, 2023. https:/www.oxfordicamersdictionaries.com/us/definition/english/knowledor'ge7g-knowledge

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 169 Knowledge Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Examples of triggering events for when new knowledge is introduced, or existing knowledge is modified or retired include. Triggering events: New knowledge base articles Modified knowledge base articles Retired knowledge base articles New knowledge articles: New product/service launch: When a new product or service is introduced, knowledge articles that explain its features, usage, troubleshooting, steps, and best practices are created. Common support issues: Frequently encountered technical issues or user queries prompt the New softwarcfapplication rollouts: Articles explaining the installation, configuration, and usage Training materials: Articles serving as training materials for employees on specific tools, systems, creation of articles with step-by-step guides for resolution. of newly implemented software or applications are generated. or methodologies are developed. Modification of knowledge articles: Updates due to software/policy changes: When there are updates or changes in software versions, policies, or regulations, articles are modified to reflect these changes accurately. User feedback: Articles are modified based on user feedback, clarifications, or suggestions for Addition of new information: When new information, tips, or solutions are discovered, articles Process changes or updates: When there are changes in internal processes, articles detailing the improvement to enhance clarity and effectiveness. are updated to include these additional details. updated procedures or workflows are created to inform employees. Retirement of knowledge articles: Outdated information: Articles containing outdated information, deprecated software, or obsolete processes are retired to prevent users from accessing irrelevant content. Redundancy: If multiple articles cover the same topic and one article is more comprehensive or up-to-date, the redundant articles might be retired to avoid confusion. No longer relevant: Articles addressing issues or topics that are no longer relevant to the organization's current operations or services might be retired. Low usage or irrelevance: Articles that receive minimal user engagement or are no longer applicable to the majority of users may be retired to declutter the knowledge base.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 170 Key inputs into the knowledge management approach and information repository could include: Inputs: Business vision, values, mission, goals, and objectives IT strategy, policies, governance, portfolio, resources, and structure Vendor management contracts Regulatory and license requirements Service level agreements Training and instructional materials Problem management Incident management Technology and solutions components Operations, use plans, and methods Business vision, values, mission, goals, and objectives: These elements provide the overarching direction and purpose for knowledge management efforts to guide the creation and alignment of IT strategy, policies, governance, portfolio, resources, and structure: Define the tramework within which IT operates to shape the approach to managing and organizing knowledge assets, determine Vendor management contracts: These agreements contain valuable information. about tools, systems, or services used within the organization to guide the creation and documentation of knowledge related to Regulatory and license requirements: Influence the creation and maintenance of knowledge articles to ensure compliance by guiding the creation of guidelines and processes to adhere to legal and regulatory Service level agreements (SLAs): Provide criteria for service delivery that helps to define knowledge articles related to troubleshooting, incident resolution, and service delivery processes to meet agreed Training and instructional materials: These materials serve as foundational resources for knowledge creation by providing insights into processes, procedures, and tools that are often transformed into Problem management: Insights gathered from problem management activities, such as root cause analyses, contribute to the creation of knowledge articles detailing solutions or workarounds for Incident management: Data and insights from incident resolution efforts help in crafting knowledge Technology and solutions components: Information about the technology stack and the solutions in use inform the creation of detailed documentation, troubleshooting guides, and best practices for managing knowledge assets to support business objectives. resource allocation, and ensure compliance with policies and governance. these vendor-based components. standards upon service levels knowledge articles or guides. recurring issues. articles to address common issues and streamline incident resolution processes. these components.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 171 Operations, use plans, and methods: Inform the creation of operational manuals, user guides, and process documentation to ensure the knowledge base reflects operations requirements. Triggering events Inputs New knowledge base articles Modified knowledge base articles Retired knowledge base articles Business vision, values, mission, goals, and objectives ITs strategy, policies, governance, portfolio, resources, and structure Vendor management contracts Regulatory and license requirements Servicel level agreements Traininga and instructional materials Problem management Incident management Technology and solutions components Operations, use plans, and methods Figure 18: Knowledge management triggering events and inputs Knowledge Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: The terminating events of a successful knowledge management event is best described as the expected outcomes related to the successful use of organizational knowledge for the delivery of value and services to customers. Examples include: Enhanced efficiency and productivity Improved decision-making Enhanced collaboration and communication Organizational resilience and adaptability Enhanced efficiency and productivity: Fasterissue resolution: Access to well-structured and up-to-date knowledge enables the quicker Streamlined processes: Clear documentation and standardized procedures improve operational resolution of IT issues by reducing downtime and boosting productivity. efficiency by reducing errors and optimizing workflows. Improved decision-making: Data-driven insights: Knowledge management provides access to data and insights, that enable informed decision-making regarding technology investments, resource allocation, and process Historical analysis: Historical knowledge enables learning from past experiences to prevent improvements. recurring mistakes and enable proactive decision-making.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management Enhanced collaboration and communication: 172 Shared understanding: A centralized knowledge repository fosters collaboration and ensures a Effective communication: Accurate and easily accessible information facilitates better shared understanding of processes and best practices across teams. communication among IT teams, departments, and stakeholders. Organizational resilience and adaptability: Agility and adaptability: A robust knowledge management system supports organizational resilience by enabling a quick adaptation to changing environments, technologies, and business Knowledge retention: Preserving institutional knowledge ensures continuity and resilience needs. against turnovers or disruptions. The outputs of a knowledge management process include: Outputs: The classification and contextualization of information for rapid retrieval and use A] published and accessible knowledge base Knowledge awareness and training Knowledge improvement initiatives The continuous improvement of knowledge articles The classification and contextualization of information for rapid retrieval and use: Information is categorized, tagged, or classified based on topics, relevance, and context. This enables easy organization and a quick retrieval of knowledge when needed. This in turn enhances the searchability and usability of information. within the knowledge base, allowing users to find relevant information swiftly. A published and accessible knowledge base: A centralized repository or platform where knowledge articles, documents, guides, and resources are published and accessible to authorized users. Provides a structured and easily accessible resource hub for employees to access information, enabling self-service Knowledge awareness and training: Programs or initiatives aimed at creating awareness among employees about the existence, importance, and utilization of the knowledge base. This: includes training on how to access and use available knowledge resources effectively and ensures that employees are aware of the knowledge base which encourages its utilization for improved productivity and problem Knowledge improvement initiatives: Ongoing efforts or programs aimed at enhancing the quality, relevance, and accuracy of knowledge articles and resources within the knowledge base. Facilitates the continuous evolution and enhancement of knowledge resources to meet changing needs, address gaps, and efficient problem-solving. solving. and ensure accuracy.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 173 The continuous improvement of knowledge articles: Regularly review, update, and refine existing knowledge articles to ensure they remain relevant, accurate, and up-to-date. This will ensure the information within articles reflects the latest best practices, solutions, or changes that will maintain the effectiveness of the knowledge base. Terminating events Outputs Enhanced efficiency and productivity Improved decision-making Enhanced collaboration and communication Organizational resilience and adaptability Classification, and contextualization of information Published and accessible knowledge base Knowledge awareness and training Knowledge improvement initiatives Continuous improvement of knowledge articles Figure 19: Knowledge management terminating events and outputs Knowledge Management: Themes and Process Activities The following are high-level themes of knowledge management. Improved decision-making: This is a central theme within knowledge management that emphasizes leveraging organized, relevant, and accessible knowledge to enhance the decision-making process across an organization. Core elements of this theme: Knowledge as a decision support asset: Knowledge is recognized as a valuable asset that informs and supports decision-making; processes. The goal is to harness available knowledge to provide insights, context, and data necessary for making informed and effective decisions. The accessibility and relevance of knowledge: This ensures the right knowledge is available to the right people at the right time. Knowledge is structured, categorized, and updated to remain The empowerment of decision-makers: This comprises empowering decision-makers by providing them with accurate, comprehensive, and up-to-date information. This enables them to evaluate options, anticipate outcomes, and assess risks based on well-informed insights. Data-driven decision-making: This encourages a culture of data-driven decision-making by integrating data and insights from various sources into the knowledge base and enables leveraging analytics, trends, and historical data to guide strategic decisions and actions. relevant and immediately applicable to decision-making contexts.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 174 In essence, this theme underscores the crucial role of knowledge management in supporting decision making processes by providing relevant, accurate, and timely information. It aims to optimize decision outcomes, reduce risks, and enhance the overall value delivered by an organization. Knowledge life cycle management: Creation and capture: This enables actively identifying, creating, and capturing relevant knowledge assets across the organization and includes documentation of best practices, lessons learned, and Organization and curation: Systematically organizing, classifying, tagging, and curating knowledge to Maintenance. and retirement: Regularly updating, maintaining, and retiring outdated or redundant knowledge assets to ensure the knowledge base remains current and aligned with organizational needs Facilitating collaboration: Creating platforms, forums, or systems that encourage the collaboration, Encouraging a knowledge-sharing culture: Promoting a culture that values knowledge sharing, where employees feel incentivized and supported to contribute, share insights, and seek knowledge from others Accessibility and usability: Ensuring that knowledge is easily accessible, user-friendly, and available in These themes collectively focus on leveraging knowledge throughout its life cycle to support the organization's strategic objectives to ensure knowledge initiatives are purpose-driven, aligned, innovative solutions. ensure its relevance, accuracy, and accessibility throughout its life cycle Knowledge sharing and collaboration: sharing, and exchange of knowledge among employees, teams, and departments various formats to cater to different learning styles and preferences collaborative, and continuously improving to drive organizational success.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 175 Knowledge management's high-level process activity descriptions The table on the following pages provides a description of the activities of knowledge management. An important note is that these activities are not linear or dependent but occur as required. Activity making: Identify and classify data and information. Description Improved decision The execution of knowledge management begins with identifying specific knowledge sources that are required and establishing the specific data and information that will feed the creation of knowledge artifacts. Identify, validate, and classify the various sources that are knowledge-based inputs to the process needed by the organization to support knowledge management goals and objectives, e.g., strategy documents, incident reports, configuration information, security, and regulatory requirements. Key triggers for this activity would include these examples: New information Incorrect information. Updated information Missing information Duplicate information Activities: Identify knowledge stakeholders and consumers, to establish information Define content types and content standards to be managed; e.g., procedures, policies, documents, workarounds, regulatory requirements, Classify knowledge artifacts and create views based on stakeholder needs to support search, retrieval, filtering, reporting, and security access. Establish owners for each knowledge artifact class and type. Define the controls for knowledge retirement. and knowledge requirements and artifacts. videos, and voice.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 176 Activity Knowledge life Manage, update, validate, or retire data and information. Description New or missing knowledge artifacts (KAs) are added to the knowledge base existing knowledge artifacts, the content will be reviewed to confirm accuracy and relevance and/or identify changes or updates to the content that may be required. Based on this review, KAs may be modified or, if they are found, it is important to define/revise links to sources of data as well as define/revise delivery mechanisms and content format as required by the cycle management: using classification and content format and/or standards. Where there are no longer required, they will be archived. If a data or information is gapin stakeholders. Activities: Collect, acquire, modify, update, and validate information with participating KA owners and consumers to understand the relevance; e.g., importance, integrity, accuracy, confidentiality. Identify KA stakeholders and support access and retrieval through Evaluate current KAs for retirement based on continued relevance or because it has been superseded by new or modified information. Remove knowledge artifacts that are redundant or duplicated. Apply version control to information and KAs and, if knowledge is retired or replaced with updated information, provide information as to Ensure the sign-off and final approval takes place by KA owners regarding availability, stakeholder access, and changes to any new, classification. why the information is no longer relevant. modified, updated, or retired records.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 177 Activity Knowledge sharing and collaboration artifacts. Description Once the knowledge has been captured in a KA, it is published according to the KB and aligned to agreed-upon formatting and content standards. In making information available and useful to those dependent on it, the format of the content of the KAs the medium, tools, and/or media to be used to access and utilize should be identified for every knowledge article class The following considerations are examples of how the KA is published for The: nature and purpose of the information: The knowledge could be needed to execute an operational activity (e.g., incident resolution or change approval); it could be needed to plan activities (e.g-, lessons learned from previous projects as input into the current project planning); it could be used to train the service desk on new or changed services or about application functionality; and it could also populate self-help tools SO that users can manage their own learning requirements. Delivery methods will vary depending on stakeholder preferences and needs. For example, knowledge to be consumed in a training program may be presented in a self-paced video; it may also include detailed supplemental guidance in the form of documents and/or a user manual for future reference following the training. In other cases, the knowledge may be contained in artifacts such as workaround records from problem management, contained in the KB, and accessible via links to the service Existing technology capabilities and solutions may impact publication choices. Internal websites such as company intranets, wiki sites, content management solutions, etc. that are the preferred knowledge sources of stakeholders will dictate how the knowledge is made available. Publish knowledge publication must address key stakeholder requirements. For example, the and type. consumption by stakeholders: management incident management records.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 178 Activity Knowledge life Measure, assess, and improve. Description It is the nature of data and information to change over time based on While all IT management practices require continuous improvement, knowledge management  much like configuration management  is viewed as valuable based on its relevance, accuracy, and currency. In part, this makes knowledge management critical as well as challenging for organizations that wish to enable individuals and teams to support mission goals. To that end, ensure the knowledge management process's critical success factors and related key performance metrics are captured and stored, and assessments and measurements are reported on a regular basis in support of The focus of these measurements is on the health and value of the process for key stakeholders, thereby ensuring the intended business value of the process is being achieved and, if not, what improvements should be enacted to achieve the intended business value. At a more tactical and operational level, the measurements can report on the activities and contributions of the Measurement of the use made of the data and information provided in Measurement of the ease of search, retrieval, and access Evaluation of the relevance, accuracy, usefulness, and currency of the data and information provided to answer specific questions or address Measurement of data and information that is not being used Assessment of the level of information and knowledge artifact ownership Assessments related to knowledge artifact mediums, platforms, and As part of this process activity, knowledge management ensures data and information quality through the following forms of assessment: cycle management: organizational shifts, technology changes, and stakeholder preferences. IT management and business results. knowledge management process staff members: knowledge artifacts problems systems Components of the quality control program: Aj just-in-time review: Every analyst that uses a KB entry is required to review that entry for content validity, format, and usability. This practice focuses the quality review on those entries that are most frequently used. On a regular basis, review trequently accessed KB entries. D KB entries will bei randomly sampled and scored based on defined criteria to ensure the quality and effectiveness of the entries. Demand-driven review: Random sampling

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 179 Knowledge Management: Actors and Roles Actors and key stakeholders in the knowledge management process: Knowledge manager: This role oversees the entire knowledge management approach, directing its implementation and ensuring the maintenance of knowledge initiatives. They focus on identifying organizational knowledge needs, devising strategies, and organizing the knowledge base. Subject matter experts (SMES): They hold specialized knowledge within specific domains. They contribute by sharing expertise, validating content, and providing insights to ensure the accuracy and Content contributors/creators: They actively generate, update, and curate knowledge content. Their responsibility involves crafting and maintaining articles, documentation, and resources that align with IT service desk: This role relies on the knowledge base to assist end-users, troubleshoot issues, and provide solutions. They contribute by updating knowledge resources based on resolved issues to ensure Learning and development and training specialists: They utilize knowledge resources to create accurate and up-to-date training materials. Their involvement ensures training programs align with End-usersemployes: They play a vital role by utilizing knowledge resources for daily tasks, providing feedback, and actively participating in the improvement of the knowledge base. All the processes have the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include: relevance of knowledge resources. their expertise and experience. the knowledge base reflects current problem-solving; methods. organizational knowledge and practices. Knowledge management process owner The knowledge manager has, in addition to the generic manager role responsibilities, the following specific accountabilities: Planning and managing support for knowledge management tools and processes Maintaining, updating, and defining knowledge artifact classes, types, and content standards Ensuring all knowledge artifacts are made accessible to those who need them in an efficient and Ensuring the quality of content by random sampling, just-in-time reviews, and demand-driven Ensuring adequate training on processes and procedures within knowledge management Ensuring adherence to and the consistent execution of the process via periodic quality assessment effective manner reviews and testing Monitoring and meeting key performance indicators Acting as a knowledge management champion Performing audits and quality reviews of all operations and procedures within the process Ensuring the security of knowledge and the appropriate access is managed and controlled Ensuring the ownership, responsibility, and accountability of knowledge artifacts

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 180 Facilitating KB user training, as requested, on both the process and the tool Encouraging a culture of knowledge-sharing collaboration, and learning Defining and driving continuous process improvement activities Defining, designing, and running relevant reports to support the measure, assess, and improve Reviewing reports to provide guidance and direction on knowledge management activities activities The knowledge management analyst: Works closely with knowledge artifact owners to establish, update, and improve information Archives redundant and superseded records by removing duplication and other maintenance ownership, accuracy, relevance, and currency activities Produces reports Publishes knowledge in a timely manner Ensures knowledge is tested and validated prior to being published Validates the knowledge article formats and standards and classification before publishing Creates knowledge management requests where gaps exist in the knowledge reviews after a Collaborates with other analysts, stakeholders, and experts to ensure the quality, accuracy, and Keeps up to date with the latest trends, tools, and techniques in knowledge management Retains all information related to a knowledge-base search (including unsuccessful searches) Demonstrates the responsibility and accountability for knowledge content procedure discussion consistency of knowledge The knowledge artifact owner: Has the specific subject matter expertise to: identify, create, manage, and maintain specific content Will perform knowledge management-related activities in accordance with the policies, goals, Identifies and documents specific knowledge artifacts within a scope of specific subject matter Ensures that content is accurate, relevant, up-to-date, and accessible to key stakeholders Works with the knowledge management manager to ensure the KB is capable of storing, protecting, and publishing information to the appropriate audiences while adhering to all in the assigned knowledge artifacts and objectives expertise relevant policies.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 181 Knowledge Management: Key Process Indicators (KPIS) The following table represents critical success factors (CSFs) and corresponding measurements to assess and improve knowledge management: CSF: Information is kept current and keeps pace with contacts, processes, tools, and applications. KPIs: The frequency of updating information The accuracy of information The level of stakeholder satisfaction with relevance, currency, and accuracy of knowledge CSF: Knowledge is properly categorized and classified to ensure access controls work correctly. Knowledge is marked or documented to ensure users are aware of distribution restrictions. KPIS: The percentage of stakeholder satisfaction with the organization, contextualization, and The percentage of knowledge artifacts that are categorized and classified according to a the ease of discovery and retrieval of knowledge predefined taxonomy CSF: Knowledge is made available to all who need it and only those who need it. The KB and solutions are properly maintained and monitored to ensure downtime is kept at a minimum. KPIS: The percentage of available knowledge actually used The decrease in unsuccessful searches CSF: The knowledge management solution allows stakeholders to access information to facilitate self-help and a better-informed customer base. This access must be controlled sO that sensitive information is not inappropriately disclosed. The increase in unique users utilizing the self-help portal KPIs: The reduction in the end user contacting the service desk through all means: The reduction in call volume to the service desk The reduction in emails to the service desk The reduction. in chat sessions with the service desk The increase in unique users utilizing the KB

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 182 CSF: The KB process includes feedback loops such as surveys, instant feedback queries, and random samplings to ensure search results are timely and topical, and the solutions are effective. KPIS: The reduction in the request for modification, errors, or missing knowledge The reduction in the number of reactive updates to knowledge artifacts based on An improvement in the reuse of knowledge artifacts through improved classification, missing information accuracy, currency, and relevance Knowledge Management Process: Integrations As indicated at the start of this guide, knowledge management has key interfaces and integrations to every other service management process with respect tol both inputs and outputs. Itis also used by overall The following are examples of some of the key integrations to consider. While knowledge management supports all ITSM processes, most organizations will start knowledge management activities in the context of production support and delivery activities such as the service desk and incident management. IT governance and management to support effective, timely, and efficient decisions. Service desk Knowledge management can support the objectives of the service desk by: Improving first-contact resolution handing and service restoration time by providing updated knowledge artifacts, articles, and documentation provided by subject matter expert teams Improving the quality and consistency of service delivery by providing accurate and up-to-date Enhancing the skills and competencies of service desk staff by providing them access to best Providing relevant and easy-to-find information. that contains solutions to repeat issues and Providing operational procedures and forms to service desk professionals to use directly or to Providing relevant scripts to support an effective triage and required information. capture Improving first-contact support by the use of effective knowledge artifacts that reduce the amount of work that must be escalated to second or third-level support agents. This improves their productivity in the completion of planned work and increases the speed to value for information to service desk staff practices and expert knowledge guidance on alternative solutions or workarounds share with end users customer-based demand.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management Incident management 183 Improved individual and team-based knowledge supported by timely access to key information that has been classified and contextualized is a critical success factor to support the objective of incident management, which is to restore service as quickly as possible. Knowledge management supports this goal by: Providing access to information related to past incidents and solutions of a similar classification Supporting the goal of incident trending and pattern matching to identify repeat issues that need Ensuring known issues or defects identified by software development, quality assurance or validation, and testing are captured as knowledge artifacts and made available to incident Providing rapid access to vendor or third-party solutions, information, bulletins, and available to be analyzed by problem management management patches for known issues Providing organizational contact data for both internal and external stakeholders Supporting the capture and publishing of content and information to support end-user self service options and channels Problem management Many organizations limit their problem management activities to major incident reviews and postmortems. This is often caused by a lack of availableinformation on incident and request recurrences, and they are unable to identify patterns based on a lack of historical data and information. Problem management is a primary provider of knowledge artifacts as well as an input to identify a gap in the effectiveness of knowledge management. Examples include: Workarounds identified through problem analysis are key knowledge articles that need to be captured as knowledge artifacts and made available to other capability and process areas such as Vendor-based bulletins of known defects and available patches are made available through Known issues that have been identified but for which a permanent solution is not available or A problem analysis that establishes a lack of the availability of critical information to key service desk, incident management, and request management knowledge management feasible are published and communicated by knowledge management stakeholders will result in knowledge management improvement

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 184 Knowledge Management: Enablers effective and efficient knowledge management approach: The following examples of tools and technologies, resources, and processes are key enablers for an Tools and technology: In the area of tools and technologies, knowledge management systems (KMS) stand as dedicated platforms that facilitate knowledge creation, organization, and storage. These systems are integrated with content management systems (CMS) to aid in structuring digital content to ensure easy access and version control. Collaboration tools like forums and wikis encourage interaction and sharing among employees to foster collaborative creation and editing. Data analytics and business intelligence tools play a crucial role in extracting insights from data to aid decision-making; based on empirical evidence. Having an effective knowledge management solution is a critical success factor to achieving the purpose and the objectives of this process. The following are examples of technology requirements for knowledge management: The knowledge management solution enables stakeholders to effectively search for and find The solution enables the process to manage, update, validate, or retire knowledge artifacts through a full life cycle process of submission, review, update, approve, publish, and retire. The solution/tool can track the usage for each knowledge artifact by stakeholder type. The solution enables knowledge artifacts to be linked to ITSM workflow records/tickets for processes such as incident management, problem management, and request management. The solution provides an automated approval capability for knowledge artifacts. The solution enables role-based access and views based on stakeholder type. relevant knowledge articles quickly. The solution enables integration with both live stakeholders as well as self-help and automated chat use cases. The solution supports a version control for KB artifacts. The solution enables security and authentication that restricts knowledge from unauthorized The solution supports integration with external knowledge repositories and sources. The solution enables stakeholders to assess and rate knowledge artifacts for relevance, accuracy, access and modification. usefulness, and currency.

Chapter 9: Knowledge Management 185 Resources: In terms of resources, skilled personnel including knowledge managers and subject matter experts (SMES) drive knowledge initiatives and contribute specialized knowledge. Training and education programs equip employees with knowledge management tool proficiency and an understanding of knowledge sharing benefits. Additionally, having knowledge champions/advocates within teams promotes a culture of knowledge sharing and management across the organization. Processes: Processes play a pivotal role. Knowledge creation and capture processes ensure the systematic capture knowledge. Processes for knowledge sharing and transfer facilitate a seamless knowledge flow among teams to foster collaboration and learning. Continuous improvement processes enable the ongoing refinement of knowledge resources based on feedback and changing organizational needs to ensure relevance and accuracy.

Chapter 10: Change Management Change management is the process of planning, implementing, and evaluating changes in the IT infrastructure, systems, and services to meet the evolving needs and goals of the business. Change management supports business objectives by ensuring changes are aligned with the business strategy to minimizing risks and disruptions, enhance performance and quality, and foster innovation and These objectives are accomplished by establishing a consistent and standardized approach to scheduling, validating quality, and determining the risk of a change in support of business outcomes. continuous improvement. Change Management: Purpose and Objectives Purpose: To ensure changes are aligned with business objectives and minimize the risks and disruptions Change: Any management activity that includes the addition, modification, removal, or transfer of The definition of a change is explicitly focused on service in that it is important to ensure any changes to an IT service is planned, tested, approved, and implemented in a controlled manner. An example of a change would be upgrading the software version of a server that hosts a web application. This change would involve adding a new service component (the updated software), modifying an existing service component (the server configuration), and removing an old service component (the previous software). The change would also require transferring the service components from a test environment to a production environment. The change would have to follow a predefined process that includes assessing the impact, risks, and benefits of the change, obtaining authorization from the relevant stakeholders, scheduling the change, communicating the change, executing the change, verifying the change, and of change service components related to an IT service documenting the change.

Chapter 10: Change Management The key objectives of change management: 187 Risks and issues related to change are identified and managed through assessment, testing, and Changes are planned and executed efficiently and communicated and documented effectively. Ensuring the appropriate level of assessment, testing, and authorization is applied to different Ensuring appropriate and validated remediation plans support change authorization and authorization per change type. change types based on business risk implementation Other objectives: Providing clear and accurate inputs So change management can expedite an effective decision Setting stakeholder expectations correctly and providing effective and accurate information to change management to make sure changes that could adversely affect the service capability and Ensuring change outcomes and results are assessed against predicted performance to support about whether a change is to be authorized introduce risk are not transitioned unchecked learning and continuous improvement Benefits of change management: A less adverse impact on the quality of IT services and the service level agreement and targets IT services provided are: more likely to match the business requirement by means of an enhanced The increased visibility and communication of changes to both business and service support staff The accumulation of valuable management information. relating to changes that will help other The increased productivity of end users due to less disruption as well as a higher quality of Increased productivity from key personnel who no longer have to be diverted from planned Better time, effort, and cost assessments of proposed changes business perception based on successful changes. Improved risk assessments service management processes become more effective and efficient services duties to address unplanned work coming from failed changes An ability to absorb a high level and rate of change without difficulty

Chapter 10: Change Management Change Management: Policies 188 "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's by a group of people or a business organization"1 goals. Policy statement Risk appetite The reason for the policy This policy area defines the willing to accept when making changes to IT systems and services. It also specifies the criteria for assessing and likelihood of risks, as well as the mitigation strategies and contingency plans for different Benefits The degree of change assessment is relative to the degree of risk, and this ensures appropriate measures are taken to ensure the change is successful and to also plan for remediation if the change is not successful. High-risk changes will require a thorough business case and senior management approval before proceeding. All changes will be assessed for level of risk the organization is risk and the impact of failure on the IT infrastructure and the business. In high-velocity organizations, categorizing the impact and peer reviews and similar techniques are acceptable. An example policy for risk appetite could be: The organization will only accept low-to-moderate risks for changes to IT systems and services that are critical for business operations or customer satisfaction. risk levels. 16 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 10: Change Management Policy statement Evidence provisioning All changes will be documented to support transparency and nonrepudiation requirements. An example policy for evidence provisioning could be: The organization will maintain a comprehensive change log for all changes made to IT systems and services. The change log will include the date, time, description, rationale, impact, approval, implementation, and verification details of each change Authorization level All changes will be approved by the appropriate roles and authority based on an assessment of business risk. An example policy for standard change approval matrix for all changes made to IT systems and services. 189 The reason for the policy This policy area outlines the requirements for documenting and providing evidence of the changes made to IT systems and services. It also specifies the standards and formats for storing and sharing the evidence, as well as the retention and disposal policies. Benefits A change log will be stored in a secure and accessible location and will be subject to regular audits and reviews. The degree of change documentation and preparation is relative to the degree of risk, and this ensures appropriate measures are taken to ensure the change is successful and to also plan for remediation if the change is not successful. This policy area determines the roles and responsibilities of different stakeholders involved in the change management process. It also defines the levels of authority and approval required for different The change approval matrix will specify the roles and responsibilities of the change requester, change owner, change manager, change control board, change implementer, and change verifier. The change approval matrix will also indicate the level of approval required for each type. authorization levels could be: types of changes, as well as the The organization will follow a escalation and anomaly procedures.

Chapter 10: Change Management Policy statement Compliance There is zero tolerance for unauthorized and undocumented changes. 190 The reason for the policy This policy area ensures the changes made to IT systems and services comply with the relevant laws, regulations, standards, policies, and best reporting, and resolving any compliance issues or incidents. Benefits A better alignment of IT changes and business needs Increased visibility and communication of the changes A reduction of negative impacts of the change on IT services due to improved business and technical impact and risk assessments Improved user productivity and higher quality services due to fewer disruptions A; greater ability to absorb a large volume of changes A single repository provides a consistent, unified view of all in-scope changes A better control of risks and issues from shadow IT All changes must be registered, practices. It also establishes the authorized, and implemented mechanisms for monitoring, through the change management process. An example policy for compliance could be: The organization will adhere to all applicable laws, regulations, standards, policies, and best practices when making changes to IT systems and services. The organization will conduct regular compliance checks and audits to verify the compliance status of each change. The organization will report any compliance issues or incidents to the appropriate authorities and take corrective actions as soon as possible. Post-change review Changes will receive a risk appropriate post implementation review. All emergency changes will be reviewed by the CCB in retrospect. All failed or less-than successful changes will be reviewed by the CCB. Clarifies the responsibility of the CCB to perform a post implementation review for all changes after they have been implemented Assures all changes are reviewed for learning opportunities after they are implemented Improves the criteria and metrics for measuring changes

Chapter 10: Change Management Policy statement Coordination All changes will be coordinated through the change management process. 191 The reason for the policy To: minimize the probability of conflicting changes and a potential disruption to the production (live) environment Benefits Eliminates disruption to the live environment because of conflicting changes and/or too much change at one Ensures a smooth and effective way to promote changes from development to production and across environments Ensures the efficient and prompt handling of change requests Improves customer service levels Improves management's information time Preapproved changes Preapproved or standard changes must be implemented using the accepted and established procedure. All standard changes will be recorded in the change logging system. Request for change A request for change (RFC) must be submitted in time for an appropriate assessment prior to authorization and implementation. Lead times are dependent on the type and categorization of a change and are documented in the organization's change categorization model. Preapproved change processes and associated change workflows should be developed and communicated to ensure that such changes are efficiently processed to support the organization's business Provide adequate time to properly evaluate and plan for the authorization, approval, and implementation of a change, while minimizing emergency changes and the impact on the organization needs. Ensures all changes have been assessed for risk and Provides an increase in customer satisfaction and a reduction of incidents or problems as a result of the change Maintains the service's availability as well as service level agreements (SLAS) impact

Chapter 10: Change Management Policy statement Change priority The change manager (with input from the initiator and other stakeholders) will allocate a priority for every RFC that is based on the impact on the business and the urgency for implementing the This priority rating is used to decide which changes should be discussed and assessed first, either by change management or by the change control board (CCB), if necessary. Change schedules A change schedule will be published and all requested and approved changes with their applicable status will be listed. The change schedule will be reviewed at each CCB Time sensitive changes Changes that require implementation in a time sensitive manner will be assessed, scheduled, and approved through an appropriate process and body. 192 The reason for the policy To ensure common guidelines and standards are used for the prioritization of any. RFC Benefits Ensures an appropriate level of efficiency by determining the sequence in which a change will be put forward based on its impact and urgency change. The system of change is understood; this reduces the chance that conflicting changes will introduce a risk of unintended consequences into the production environment. Reduces the likelihood of unintended consequences to any change or group of changes meeting. Ensures as little risk as possible is introduced into the production environment during a change Ensures the risk of a business service interruption during a change is minimized

Chapter 10: Change Management Policy statement Change testing All changes require the successful completion of testing before being implemented into the production environment when there is a test environment in place. At a minimum, validation in the production environment must occur when no test environment is available. Every change will have a test or validation plan in Change categorization All changes that impact a service capability will be assessed for performance and risk as well as the resources needed to implement the change. Based on the assessment, categorization will be used to identify the level of authorization required for the change. Change reporting Change management metrics and management reports will be provided to management and customers in accordance with outlined procedures and agreements. 193 The reason for the policy Ensures any changes are tested prior to being implemented into the production environment and that any emergency change not tested prior to implementation requires risk analysis and approval Benefits Reduces the likelihood for failed changes and the subsequent cost to customers for unplanned downtime place. To ensure a change is assigned a category; this will provide the information required to define the level of authorization Provides an increased service availability and ensures the proper authorization levels for changes Improves management's information Assessing the performance measures (e.g, efficiency and effectiveness) of the change management process Communicates incidents and problems as a result of a change Provides a trend analysis Identifies opportunities for improvement

Chapter 10: Change Management 194 Change Management: Terms and Definitions Change: Any management activity that includes the addition, modification, removal, or transfer of service components related to an IT service Additional definitions within change: Successful change: A change that has realized the planned outcome and results as described and approved in the change request document A change is considered successful based on the following criteria: a No change-related incidents: As a result of the change being implemented into the production environment, there have been no incidents that are directly related to the change Following the change, there are no other failures to any other components or Within the RFC, an outline of the specific change has been detailed that includes the timeline for the change to take place, the activities of the change required, the roles involved, check lists to ensure integrity, and the policies checked and confirmed. Any information. pertaining to the accuracy of the The change requestor and customer are satisfied with the implemented No other failures: service components related to the change The request for change (RFC) has been satisfied: change has been confirmed successful and checked off. change and results and are willing to close the change. Acceptance of the change: Failed change: A change that has not realized the planned outcome or results as intended and documented The failure of a change is deemed as such if the results of the change are not as successful as expected, and the change manager determines it has failed after consulting with the change within the change request document initiator and release and deployment management. A failed change may result from any of the following: a One or more incidents occurred The change must be backed out of for any reason a The change goes past the required implementation date The change was not implemented according to schedule The change has left the service in a state that is unusable or unmaintainable Successful change with issues: A change that has realized its intended outcome according to the original request but has resulted in unplanned consequences or resource consumption (time, costs, etc.)

Chapter 10: Change Management Backed out change: 195 A change that has failed or not realized its planned outcome or results, which has been determined by the policy or process to require a reversion back to the original pre-change state. Note: It is possible to also establish a policy that requires the back out of a change if the change in progress is taking longer than the approved change window. A request for change (RFC): A submission of a request to schedule and approve a deployment of a The RFC is not necessarily the same as the change record. The RFC is the request to make a change that may be in the form of an email, document, or even an initial form within the change record. change into a live environment. Change type and lead times: Lead time is a process measure that derives from the Lean and business process management domains. Itm represents the entire period between receiving a request or order from a customer and ends at the point Change lead times start from the point a request for change is received and includes the full elapsed time it takes for a change request to be approved and implemented in a change process. Change lead times can vary depending on the type, scope, complexity, and urgency of the change, as well as the availability of resources, stakeholders, and approvals. Change lead times are important to measure and monitor because they can affect the quality, cost, and schedule of the change process. A shorter change lead time can indicate a more agile and responsive organization, while a longer change lead time can indicate a more rigid and risk-averse organization. However, change lead times should also be balanced with the impact and value of the change, as well as the potential risks and issues that may arise from value is delivered. implementing the change too quickly or too slowly. Change type: Time-sensitive change A time-sensitive change is one that cannot tolerate or meet the lead time requirements of the normal Reasons for a time-sensitive change may be a time-sensitive business or regulatory deadline where the business impact of not implementing this change quickly would result in a significant risk or financial process. impact to the customer: Change type: Response to incident One type of time-sensitive change is based on the need to rapidly restore a service or to respond quickly to address an imminent possibility of an incident (such as an imminent outage or the application of a Changes that are based on an incident or the likelihood of an incident are typically based on meeting security patch to close a discovered security weakness). service level performance targets and agreements. Typical change control or approvers: Due to the time sensitivity, it is common to rely mostly on a verbal process during the period of the change and follow up with the appropriate level of documentation and reporting after the time-sensitive nature of the change has passed.

Chapter 10: Change Management 196 While the nature of the process is mostly managed verbally, a process is still followed and the appropriate level of risk assessment, testing, and contingency planning still needs to It is a good practice to establish a specialized authorization role or group that has the In some cases, it may be required that more documentation is required for an expedited It is also a good practice to have a working back-out plan for time sensitive change. be considered for these changes. authority to authorize urgent and emergency changes. or time-sensitive change than normal after the change has closed. Change type: Preapproved A preapproved or standard change is any change that is low-risk, has limited impact if it fails, is performed frequently, must be recorded each time it is performed, and has been preapproved by the Examples include aj provision of standard equipment to a new employee or the creation of a preapproved In high-velocity organizations following Agile and DevOps approaches, preapproved changes are often fully automated in their execution, deployment, and release by a continuous delivery pipeline. Requests for change (RFCS) are not required toi implement a standard change. However, they are logged and tracked using a different mechanism such as a service request, predefined change template, or appropriate authority. virtual machine. automated change record. Preapproved changes may contain one or more of the following characteristics: The changes will have a low risk and low impact on the overall availability to the service. The changes have been tested successfully on numerous occasions. There is a well understood recovery and/or back-out plan. The potential negative impact of the change is limited, and the recovery options for service resilience are highly automated. This is true in the case of a loosely coupled microarchitecture, for example, or the usage of release strategies such as canary releases. Canary releases test the change in a limited fashion for success and then fully release once the initial test is successful. There are no additional authorizations required to proceed with the change. The change management process should have an established procedure for submitting low-risk changes as candidates to become preapproved or as standard changes based on their meeting predefined criteria. Upon the successful award of approved change status, the change still needs to be logged to support traceability and nonrepudiation requirements but does not need additional approvals. Change type: Meets lead time A change that meets lead times is any change that can be managed within the normal change processing time and has not been previously approved by the change authority.

Chapter 10: Change Management Change risk levels 197 One of the key factors that influence the authorization of a change request in an IT service management change process is the level of risk involved. Risk is defined as the probability and impact of an adverse event or outcome that may affect the service delivery or the business objectives. Different levels of risk require different levels of authorization that depend on the complexity, urgency, and potential For example, a low-risk change is one that has minimal impact on the service or the business and can be easily reversed or corrected if something goes wrong. A low-risk change may only need the approval of the change owner or the change manager and can bei implemented quickly and without much disruption. A high-risk change: is one that has a significant impact on the service or the business and may be difficult or costly to reverse or correct if something goes wrong. A high-risk change may need the approval of several stakeholders such as the service owner, the business owner, the IT director, and senior The level of risk can be determined by using a risk assessment matrix that evaluates the likelihood and severity of various scenarios that may result from the change. The risk assessment matrix can help to categorize the change into one of four levels: low, medium, high, or extreme. Each level has a corresponding authorization process that defines who needs to approve the change, how long it takes to get approval, and what documentation and communication are required. By following the appropriate authorization process based on the level of risk, the IT service management change process can ensure changes are implemented in a controlled and efficient manner while minimizing the negative impacts on consequences of the change. management and may require careful planning and testing before implementation. the service and the business. Normal change risk levels The normal change type can have multiple levels within this one general type based on risk. The following subcategories typically exist within the normal change type: 1. Al low-risk change: Low-impact changes have a minimal negative impact on services but are not presently on the Typical change approval: Line management staff or the product owner for a specific preapproved list. product 2. Ai medium-risk change: Medium-impact changes may affect one or more customers but do not impact a business-critical service, represent a higher risk, and/or do not necessarily require a significant dedication of Medium-risk changes should be scheduled during the normal maintenance window or at an Typical change approval: A technical peer group (peer-to-peer) or change control board resources to implement. agreed-upon time established with the customer contact: (CCB)

Chapter 10: Change Management 3. Al high-risk change: 198 High-impact changes contain one or more of the following characteristics: A] potential impact on a business-critical service a A significant dedication of the cross-functional resources a Affect the business direction and plan of the company A change that needs to be implemented prior to normal lead times: a A significant financial outlay Typical change approval: Multi-level that includes technical, CCB, and senior leadership sign-off The change schedule A critical success factor and key output of the change management process is the creation, monitoring, and management of a holistic change schedule containing key details of all approved change events The key goal of this schedule is to identify the optimum time to schedule changes in relationship to each other that consider the potential overlaps of timing and resources, as well as periods ofl business intensity The change schedule should include all change types including preapproved or standard changes initiated as part of request management. Change schedulingis) responsible for establishing and managing within the service environment. that include the management of a change freeze period if necessary. both the change maintenance windows as well as the freeze periods. The change maintenance window: Routinely required changes or updates are typically scheduled for the same times each week/monthyquarter. This allows for a minimal disruption of service to the users and gives them an implementation schedule to follow. It also minimizes problems during critical business periods. The change freeze period: Change freeze periods are often put in place to protect the production environment during critical business periods. During these freeze periods, only emergency changes are Recognized busy times should be identified and avoided when planning changes to the production environment. This issue is managed through the requirement to have change permitted. schedules approved by all owners of critical applications. The change record A change record is a record containing the details of a change. Each change record documents the life cycle of a single change. A change record is created for every request for change that is received, even those that are subsequently rejected. Change records should reference the service components that are affected by the change. Change records may be created automatically.

Chapter 10: Change Management High-velocity and continuous delivery: 199 Organizations that are adopting high-velocity practices apply both architectural and process-based strategies to move more of their change volumes to low-risk or preapproved changes. Organizational, architectural and process dependencies: The following areas represent best practice, architectural, and organizational characteristics that would be necessary for organizations to adjust their change management process to support the business need for speed to market and balanced risk: Technology: The majority of the technology environment is software-defined and supports continuous Change risks can be lowered through leveraging abstraction techniques such as containerization Testing coverage is high across technology environments to support continuous deployment practices based on automated testing results for go/no-go decisions to deploy changes. Shared platform tooling is leveraged by the product teams, which is enabled by standard artifacts, delivery automation, cloud-based elasticity, self-healing, and remediation. and serverless computing. deployment scripts, and/orchestration automation. People: Developers are willing to use standard scripts and engage in practices such as test-driven Testing is done closer to the source (quality at the source/shift left) and not delegated to Developers or change initiators are accountable for the quality of the change and have to deal with the consequences of a failed change themselves (the authority and accountability must The organization invests in proactive problem management with blameless postmortems to learn The culture does not punish people for making mistakes or, alternatively, load them down with more controls. Instead, mistakes are understood as inevitable within complex systems and that they should be used by the organization to learn and get stronger rather than look for a scapegoat. The organization is leveraging deployment and release strategies that lower risks such as canary, blue/green, feature toggles, and dark launches to progressively test releases and fall back rapidly The organization has a strong discipline around configuration management and version control. The organization understands the question of change readiness is established by the service The change model being used is based on assessing risks and, based on the change model, development and continuous integration. downstream teams removed from the developers. match). from past issues versus simply focusing on major incident reviews. Processes: if necessary. assurance and testing capability, not change management. different levels of authority are required. Partners: Partner contracts include aspects of all the points above as well as the agreement to follow shared practices and be involved in continuous improvement as a member of the team.

Chapter 10: Change Management 200 Change Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events: Ai request for a new feature or functionality A security vulnerability A compliance requirement A request for a new feature or functionality, a security vulnerability, and a compliance requirement are triggering events for an ITSM change management process because they all require changes to the IT infrastructure or services that may affect the business operations or objectives. Inputs: A change request Risk and business impact assessments Change, release, and deployment plans The change calendar Agreed-upon maintenance windows Test results for change and remediation plans Configuration records Policies Other? A change request: This is a submission of a request to schedule and approve a deployment of a change Risk and business impact assessments: These are evaluations of the potential consequences and benefits Change, release, and deployment plans: These are documents that outline the steps, roles, and resources into a live environment. of a change. needed to implement a change. The change calendar: This is a schedule of approved and upcoming changes. Agreed-upon maintenance windows: These are periods of time when changes can be made with Test results for change and remediation plans: These are evidence that a change has been verified and Configuration records: These are records of the attributes and relationships of service components, minimal disruption to the business. can be rolled back if needed. which are the components of an IT service or system. Policies: These are rules and guidelines that govern the change management process.

Chapter 10: Change Management management to effectively: 201 These key inputs help the change management process support the goals and objectives of change Evaluate the feasibility, urgency, and priority of a change request Assess the risks and impacts of a change on the business, customers, and other IT services or Plan and coordinate the activities, roles, and resources required to implement a change Schedule and execute the change according to the change calendar and maintenance windows Document and update the configuration records of the affected service components systems Communicate and consult with stakeholders about the change Test and verify the change before and after deployment Monitor and review the change outcomes and benefits Identify and resolve any issues or incidents caused by the change Learn from the change experience and implement improvements Triggering events Arequest for a new feature orf functionality As security vulnerability Ac compliance requirement Inputs Ac change request Riska and business impactassessments Change, release, and deployment plans The change calendar Agreed-upon maintenance windows Testr results for change and remediation plans Configuration records Policies Other? Figure 20: Change management triggering events and inputs Change Management: Terminating Events and Outputs A terminating event: A completed change, successfully deployed and verified A failed/rejected change A completed change is a terminating event for an ITSM change management process because it means A failed/rejected change is also a terminating event for an ITSM change management process because it means the change has not met its objectives or has been rejected by the stakeholders. In both cases, the the change has achieved its objectives and has been accepted by the stakeholders. change record is closed, and the lessons learned are documented for future reference. Outputs: Approved or rejected change requests An updated change calendar Improvement opportunities A change request Knowledge

Chapter 10: Change Management 202 Approved or rejected change requests: These are the records of the decisions made by the change authority after evaluating the impact, risk, and benefits of each proposed change. They should include the rationale for the approval or rejection, as well as any conditions or constraints that apply to the An updated change calendar: This is a tool that shows the planned dates and times of all approved changes, as well as any dependencies or conflicts among them. It helps to coordinate and schedule the change activities, as well as to inform the stakeholders and users about the expected service disruptions Improvement opportunities: These are the suggestions or recommendations for enhancing the efficiency, effectiveness, or quality of the change management process or the services that are affected by the changes. They can be identified by analyzing the feedback, metrics, or lessons learned from the An updated change request: This is a modified version of the original change request that reflects any changes in the scope, requirements, or specifications of the change that occurred during the implementation or evaluation stages. It should be approved by the change authority before proceeding Knowledge outputs: These are the documents or records that capture and share the information and experience gained from the change management process. They can include best practices, guidelines, policies, procedures, templates, checklists, reports, or case studies. They can be used to improve future implementation of the change. or downtimes. change implementation and evaluation. with the next steps of the change life cycle. changes, train new staff, or support audits or reviews. Terminating event Outputs Ac completed change, successfully deployed and verified Af failed/rejected change Approved or rejected change requests An updated change calendar Improvement opportunities A change request Knowledge Figure 21: Change management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 10: Change Management 203 Change Management: Themes and Activities Planning is the first theme of change management, and it involves identifying the need for change, assessing the impact and risks of the change, defining the objectives and scope of the change, and developing a detailed plan for implementing the change. Some specific process activities that would support planning are: Performing a gap. analysis to determine the current state and the desired state of the IT system or Conducting a stakeholder analysis to identify who will be affected by the change and what their Creating a change request document that outlines the rationale, objectives, scope, benefits, costs, Establishing a change control board (CCB) that will oversee and approve the change request Communication is the second theme of IT change management, and it involves informing and engaging all relevant parties about the change, its purpose, its progress, and its outcomes. Some specific process service expectations and concerns are risks, and timeline of the change activities that would support communication are: Developing a communication plan that specifies the communication objectives, methods, Sending regular updates and notifications to the stakeholders about the status and milestones of Providing training and support to the users and staff who will be affected by the change Soliciting feedback and input from the stakeholders throughout the change process Execution involves carrying out the tasks and actions required to implement the change according to the plan and ensures appropriate authorization of the change occurs. Some specific process activities that channels, frequency, and audience of the change the change would support execution are: Assigning roles and responsibilities to the change team members Following the steps and procedures outlined in the change plan Testing and verifying the functionality and performance of the changed IT system or service Monitoring and controlling the quality, scope, schedule, budget, and risks of the change Submitting the change request document to the CCB for review and approval Presenting the business case and risk assessment of the change to the CCB and other decision Negotiating and resolving any issues or conflicts that may arise during the authorization process Documenting and communicating the approval or rejection of the change request Review involves evaluating the results and outcomes of the change, identifying any lessons learned or best practices, and closing out the change project. Some specific process activities that would support Measuring and analyzing the benefits and impacts of the change against the objectives and criteria Conducting a post-implementation review (PIR) to identify what went well and what can be Celebrating and recognizing the achievements and contributions of the change team members makers review are: improved in future changes Documenting and sharing the findings and recommendations from the PIR

Chapter 10: Change Management 204 The following table represents a high-level set of activities for change management. Activity Planning: request Description The submission. of the request for change (RFC) typically follows a standard set of requirements to support the initial review and an understanding of the Though there may be different types of change records (based on the change type) with different sets of attributes, it is recommended to standardize Review the change risks of the size, complexity, and timing of the change. wherever possible. Basic actions include: Creating a change record Confirming the change owner Confirming change details Classifying the change request (change type) value to the business; all changes must be justified added or updated through the change life cycle. The acceptance or rejection is dependent on the basis of completeness and Some information is recorded when the record is initiated, and some may be The change manager will review and filter the RFC according to the policies determined by the organization.

Chapter 10: Change Management 205 Activity Planning: Assess and prioritize. Description Changes are categorized and prioritized based on the assessed customer Changes are classified according to the risk level of the change for the purpose of ensuring the correct level of oversight when assessing the change: The assessment identifies the appropriate approvers. The greater the impact and/or higher the risk, the higher the level of assessment and approval is typically required. This activity ensures the change assessment is carried out from a number of different perspectives to ensure all unintended and intended effects of The risk assessment should ensure the intended effects of changes match value, risks, and time sensitivity. changes are understood. the acceptance criteria of the change. Activities of the assessment include the outcomes of: Assigning and notifying approvers Assuring a technical risk analysis Assuring a business risk analysis Assuring test and fallback procedures Receiving authorization/approval Notifying the change owner Predicted performance versus acceptance criteria (as applicable) Recommending whether to accept or reject the change Any authorization or denial decisions should be communicated to all stakeholders, in particular to the initiator of the RFC. The authorization of change requests are provided by the appropriate change approval role or board and is based on the change type. For changes that are rejected, a reason should be documented and communicated to the change initiator. In some cases, there may be an appeal made for the rejected change that would be handled using normal Planning: Authorize the change management channels.

Chapter 10: Change Management 206 Activity Communication: Schedule the change. Description Once approved, changes are scheduled and communicated to the The change is scheduled to avoid change conflicts and to adhere to the Once authorized to proceed, the change is moved forward for implementation by the release and deployment process based on the The change schedule is published and shared with all stakeholders, including Regular updates are provided to keep all stakeholders apprised of the appropriate stakeholders. agreed-upon change window. approved change schedule. other processes such as incident management. change's progress.

Chapter 10: Change Management 207 Activity Execution: Make the change. Description Once approved and scheduled, the change is executed according to plan. Action steps may include: Resource allocation: Allocate resources: Ensure necessary resources (financial, human, technological) are available to implement the change effectively. Assign responsibilities: Define roles and responsibilities for team members involved in executing the change. Execute pilot/test: Conduct pilot testing (if applicable): Implement the change on a small scale or in a controlled environment to assess its impact and identify Gather feedback: Collect feedback from the pilot phase to address any potential issues. issues before full implementation. Implement change: Execute the implementation plan: Follow the established plan, ensuring all necessary steps are taken as per the proposed change. Monitor progress: Track implementation: Continuously monitor the change implementation Address challenges: Proactively address any unexpected challenges or obstacles that arise during the implementation process. Execute the backout plan if the change results are not successful. to ensure it progresses according to the plan. Training and support: Provide training: Offer training sessions or resources to employees affected by the change to facilitate a smooth transition. Aftercare support: Establish support mechanisms (help desk, FAQs, support teams) to assist individuals adapting to the change. Communicate results: Share results: Communicate the outcomes of the change implementation, highlighting successes and improvements achieved.

Chapter 10: Change Management 208 Activity Review: Post implementation review Description Following the completion of a release of a change (success or failure), the results of the change should be reviewed for follow-up action or improvement. A post-implementation review of high-risk and impact changes should be carried out to confirm that the change: Meets success criteria Supports customer outcome goals Has not resulted in unforeseen events or incidents appropriate mitigation or follow-up actions. For unsuccessful or incomplete changes, the process should identify the Upon the successful completion of all change activity, the change record Review: Close the change. should be closed. Change Management: Actors and Roles The following actors have different roles and responsibilities in this process: Change authorizer: This is the person or group with the authority to approve or reject a change request. The change authorizer evaluates the impact, risk, and benefits of the proposed change and decides whether it should proceed or not. The change authorizer may also impose conditions Support teams: These are the teams responsible for delivering and maintaining the IT services that are affected by the change. The support teams provide input to the change request such as technical details, feasibility, and an estimated effort. The support teams also implement the Change coordinator: This is the person who is responsible for coordinating and facilitating the change management process. The change coordinator acts as a single point of contact for all the other actors and ensures the change request is properly documented, assessed, authorized, communicated, implemented, and reviewed. The change coordinator also manages the change Change stakeholders: These are the people who are affected by or interested in the change. The change stakeholders include the customers, users, business owners, and managers of the IT services that are involved in the change. The change stakeholders provide feedback and requirements to the change request and are informed about the status and outcome of the change. or limitations on the change such as time frames, resources, or dependencies. change according to the approved plan and verify that it works as expected. calendar and resolves any conflicts or issues that arise during the process.

Chapter 10: Change Management 209 Agile development teams: These are the teams who use an Agile methodology to develop new or improved IT services or products. The Agile development teams work in short iterations or sprints and deliver incremental value to the customers or users. The Agile development teams collaborate with the other actors in the change management process and align their work with DevOps: This is a culture or practice that aims to integrate development and operations activities to foster collaboration and communication between them. DevOps enables a faster and more reliable delivery of IT services or products by automating and streamlining processes such as testing, deployment, monitoring, and feedback. DevOps also supports continuous improvement All processes encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include: the strategic goals and priorities of the organization. and innovation by encouraging experimentation and learning from failures. The change manager The change manager is a pivotal role in the change management process. The day-to-day facilitation and approval of changes as well as facilitation of the change control board are within the change managers'responsibilities. The change manager is also responsible for convening the appropriate approval roles for In addition to the generic responsibilities of the manager role, some key responsibilities include: changes requiring time-sensitive or incident management response times. Planning and coordinating all resources needed to evaluate changes Tabling all RFCS that require a change control board (CCB) to review, issuing an agenda, and Convening urgent CCB meetings for all time-sensitive and incident-related RFCS Chairing all CCB meetings and documenting the minutes of the meeting circulating all RFCS to the CCB Preparing and publishing the change schedules Ensuring standardized methods and techniques are used for the preparation, building, testing, and implementation of changes to meet service levels and prevent change-related incidents Ensuring change management and other service management processes are provided with Receiving, logging, and allocating a priority, in collaboration with the initiator, to all RFCS; Coordinating the impact assessment, planning, and authorization of RFCS in cooperation with Deciding which people will come to which meetings, who gets specific RFCS depending on the nature of the RFC, what is to be changed, and individuals'areas of expertise After consideration of the advice given by the CCB, authorizing acceptable changes Reviewing all implemented changes to ensure they have met their objectives; referring any that Reviewing all outstanding RFCS awaiting consideration or awaiting action Analyzing change records to determine any trends or apparent problems that occur, seeking governance and control information (such as policies) rejecting any RFCS that do not meet minimum quality standards members of the CCB have been backed out or have failed rectification with relevant parties

Chapter 10: Change Management The change analyst 210 In addition to the generic responsibilities of the analyst role, some key responsibilities include: If applicable for the department, monitor the change records in the service management tool and Monitoring and providing progress information on the scheduled changes being worked on when required (in the change record and in accordance with the change schedule) Identifying possible bottlenecks and issues regarding scheduled changes and communicating Updating or providing information regarding service requests, standard changes, and RFCS (in Obtaining the technical and/organizational knowledge required to perform the activities in the Providing proactive information when activities relating to the change management process (e.g, release management activities that involve building and testing activities should feed into the the change schedule them to the change manager the change records if possible) most frictionless way possible change management process) Escalating to the change manager if required Change control board (CCB) The CCB is made up of key stakeholders and subject matter experts from different technology domains and business representatives who will meet as required depending on the scope, risk, and volume of changes under their authority for approval. Key responsibilities include: Discussing and assessing the changes brought forth, which include: Validating documentation and the evidence provided a Assessing the risk, impact, timing, and relationships Confirming or updating the prioritization of the change new requests for preapproved changes Approving/denying changes Approving or denying medium and high-level risk changes and may also include approving Ensuring change management policies have been adhered to throughout the change A typical CCB meeting encompasses the review and approval of prior meeting actions. Example agenda items: Review previously implemented changes: Review whether the change had the desired effect and met its objective. Identify any unexpected or undesirable side effects (i.e., performance degradations, capacity problems, or security issues). Determine any follow-up items. Determine if process policies were followed. Review and decide on current RFCs: Approved changes for scheduling Determine if and when post-implementation reviews will occur. Review and approve new requests for a standard change's status based on defined criteria.

Chapter 10: Change Management 211 Change Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Implement changes efficiently and effectively. KPIs: The percentage increase of changes successful and realized as scheduled: The number of successful changes The number of implemented changes on schedule The percentage increase of preapproved/standard changes managed within the change process: The total number of changes The total number of preapprove/standard changes compared to all changes The percentage reduction in the change backlog The percentage increase in the n umber of successful changes The percentage increase in the number of changes meeting the customer, S agreed-upon requirements (quality, cost, time) The percentage reduction of the average time spent to assess changes The percentage reduction of the average time spent to build changes The percentage reduction of the average time spent to test changes The percentage reduction of the average time spent to deploy changes The percentage reduction in the number of emergency changes The percentage reduction in the number of changes that do not have remediation plans CSF: Minimize the impact of changes. KPIs: The percentage reduction in the number of changes causing incidents The percentage reduction in the number of delayed changes The percentage reduction in the number of rejected changes The percentage reduction in the number of unapproved changes The percentage reduction in the number of incidents per change The percentage reduction in the number of changes that have been reassessed The percentage reduction in the number of changes that have been resubmitted through the process The percentage reduction in the number of backed-out changes

Chapter 10: Change Management 212 CSF: Change management is controlled. KPIs: Reduce the percentage of undocumented changes (changes that bypassed the process) Reduce the percentage of emergency and urgent changes in comparison to normal or An increase in the percentage of changes assigned to the correct change authority An increase in the percentage of changes completed within the change window An increase in the percentage of standard changes that are fully or semi-automated standard changes CSF: Effectively identify risks. KPIS: The percentage reduction in the number of changes where initial risk levels have been changed based on an assessment and/or a post-implementation review The percentage increase of awareness of risks identified during the build, test, and The percentage reduction of undocumented known issues introduced into the live deploy phase environment Change Management: Integrations Process integration is the coordination and alignment of activities, data, and workflows across different processes to achieve a common goal. In IT service management, process integration is essential to ensure the quality, efficiency, and effectiveness of service delivery and support. Incident management: One example of process integration is between change management and incident management. Change management is the process of controlling the life cycle of changes to the IT infrastructure and services, while incident management is the process of restoring normal service operations as quickly as possible after an interruption or degradation. These two processes are interrelated because changes can cause incidents, and incidents can trigger changes. Process integration between change management and incident management involves: Communicating and documenting changes to the incident management team, SO they can Escalating incidents that require changes to the change management team, sO they can assess and Reviewing and evaluating the impact of changes on incidents, and vice versa, to identify identify and resolve incidents caused by changes authorize the changes opportunities for improvement and to prevent recurrence

Chapter 10: Change Management 213 Change management will assist incident management with the coordination of requested Change management provides the change schedule to the service desk and incident management to maintain a high-level awareness of changes scheduled and those recently implemented changes and the resolution of the incident Configuration management Another example of process integration is between change management and configuration management. Configuration management is the process of identifying, tracking, and maintaining the service components that make up the IT infrastructure and services, while change management is the process of controlling the life cycle of changes to the service components. These two processes are interdependent, as changes affect the configuration, and the configuration influences the changes. Therefore, process integration between change management and configuration management involves: Updating and verifying the service component repository (SCR) after every change to ensure it Consulting and referencing the SCR before every change to understand the relationships and Auditing and reconciling the SCR, periodically, to detect and correct any discrepancies or When deciding on the scope of configuration management, it is important to understand the relative control, deployment, and maturity of change management over the organization. To be successful, the scope of configuration management should be linked to the level of control reflects the current state of the service components dependencies among the service components unauthorized changes exercised by change management. Additional integrations include: IT asset management (ITAM): The change management and ITAM processes should work together seamlessly for the IT asset repository to accurately reflect the changes that have taken place and to be a trusted source of The IT asset repository is used by change management to assist with change planning. IT asset management provides policies for the inclusion of IT asset management activities in Change management provides information. updates to the IT asset repository related to install, Change management can use information from the IT asset repository to identify unauthorized IT asset management provides IT asset information to support a change assessment. Change management provides information used to assess the IT asset performance and value. information. change management. move, add, and change (IMAC) activities. changes being made to the production environment.

Chapter 10: Change Management Release and deployment management: 214 Change management will provide the authorization to deploy and release. Change management will ensure deployment plans include back-out and remediation plans. Release and deployment will provide the details for the deployment and release of a change to Deployment management will inform change management of the success and timing for Release management will inform change management of the successful release, training, Change management will ensure all deployments have been successfully tested as a condition of Change management will assist in determining appropriate deployment times to avoid change Deployment management will inform change management of missed change windows or of Release and deployment will provide feedback and information when post-implementation support risk assessment and change planning. authorized deployments. acceptance, and handover to operations for all related changes. the authorization to proceed. conflict and to fit agreed-upon change windows. failed deployments along with the remediation status. reviews (PIR) are conducted. Problem management: Change management provides problem management access to change records to conduct point in-time problem and root cause investigations and analyses for conducting risk assessments and Problem management will submit RFCS to implement problem solutions when a change is Change management will collaborate with problem management for submitted RFCS and will Problem management will associate problem records with changes suspected of causing the Problem management will provide change management with details of bad changes where they determining solutions for the root cause elimination/mitigation. justified to resolve the problem. communicate the change status and outcome. associated incident(s) as well as RFCS submitted to resolve the incident. are detected through incident and problem control. Business relationship management (BRM): BRM may raise and facilitate RFCS on behalf of their customers. BRM: may represent their customers in CCB meetings and other change assessment activities. BRM may assist with or complete business justifications on behalf of their customers that are required for change approval.

Chapter 10: Change Management 215 Change will provide BRMS with RFC status updates and progress information for Change management will solicit feedback for customer satisfaction with changes through the communication with customers. BRM. Request management: The processes will collaborate regarding the definition and understanding of differences in scope Change management will inform and collaborate with request management when defining and approving preapproved changes that will be requested through request management. Change management will inform and collaborate with request management when changes are being considered or made to preapproved changes that are requested through request The request process will forward requests that are changes either in error or as the appropriate between requests and changes. management. way for a customer to access change management. Service catalog management: The service catalog may publish information on channels as well as options to request changes to Change management will provide service catalog management where change windows are services. published for services. Change Management: Enablers Technology enablers for the IT change management process: Change management software: This is a tool that helps to automate and streamline the change management workflow such as creating and approving change requests, tracking, and Collaboration platforms: These are platforms that facilitate communication and coordination among the change stakeholders such as project managers, change owners, change implementers, and change reviewers. Examples of collaboration platforms are Microsoft Teams, Slack, and Service component repository: This is a database that stores information about the service components in the IT environment such as hardware, software, network devices, and services. It helps to identify the dependencies and impacts of a change on the service components and the IT Testing tools: These are tools that help to verify and validate the quality and functionality of a change before it is implemented in the production environment. Examples of testing tools are monitoring change progress, and reporting on change outcomes. Zoom. services they support. Selenium, JUnit, and Postman.

Chapter 10: Change Management 216 Resources (data, people, budget) needed to support the IT change management process: Data: This includes the data that is required to plan, execute, and evaluate a change, such as the change scope, objectives, risks, benefits, costs, schedule, roles and responsibilities, success criteria, People: This includes the people who are involved in or affected by a change such as the change sponsor, change manager, change owner, change implementer, change reviewer, change control board (CCB), and end users. Each person has a specific role and responsibility in the change Budget: This includes the financial resources that are allocated to fund a change project such as capital expenditure (CAPEX) and operational expenditure (OPEX) for purchasing or maintaining and performance metrics. management process. the service components involved in a change. Process documentation needed to support IT change management: Change management policy: This is a document that defines the purpose, scope, principles, roles and responsibilities, and governance of the change management process. It also establishes the criteria and categories for classifying changes based on their urgency, impact, and risk. Change management plan: This is a document that outlines the specific steps and activities for managing a change project from initiation to closure. It also defines the communication plan, risk management plan, stakeholder management plan, quality management plan, and resource Change request form: This is a document that captures the details of a proposed change such as the description, justification, priority, impact analysis, implementation plan, testing plan, backout Change log: This is a document that records the history of changes that have been implemented in the IT environment. It also tracks the status and outcomes of changes that are in progress or management plan for a change project. plan, approval status, and implementation status of a change. pending approval.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management Release and deployment management ensures business and customer-value objectives are met by delivering service changes that are safe, effective, and efficient in a live environment. This process aligns the IT and business perspectives by coordinating the planning, testing, and implementation of service The process is tightly integrated with planning, as well as coordination with the service assurance and testing process, and with change management. It also ensures releases are implemented in a controlled Release and deployment management takes a holistic view of planning and ensures both technical and nontechnical release requirements are considered together with the involvement of both internal service The release and deployment process covers distinct transitional activities in coordination with several changes across the organization. and systematic way that avoids or limits negative impacts to existing IT services. providers and external vendor stakeholders. other processes such as: Product and service planning/design/development and control Service assurance and testing Change management Configuration management Cyber, security, and risk management The release and deployment management process is divided into two different phases related to the decisions and activities necessary to move service changes into a live environment for use by customers. The scope of release management covers both an initial planning phase as well as a final customer directed decision (release on demand) about the timing and the set of actions to take to make the release Release management: available for use: Release planning: Working with the business and/or customer stakeholder, the product owner/service owner identifies the customer requirements regarding release timing, constraints, regulatory requirements, financial and budgetary guardrails, etc. This information and an agreement between the customer and service providers is provided as input into the product and service design and development process activities of the service provider.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 218 Release on demand: The release-on-demand aspect of this process indicates that the timing and cadence of when a release is made available to the service consumer is based on the initial release planning schedule and the final acceptance of the customer as ready to receive the release. The release may be scheduled based on the customer's agreed-upon schedule or placed in a software store for the customer to pull the release when ready. Deployment management: Deployment management is responsible for the coordination. and execution of the orchestration and provisioning activities as well as the automation. needed to move a release into a live environment. Deployment management: Once final authorization and scheduling has been confirmed by change management, the deployment activities are initiated to move the release package from a non-live to a live environment. It is important to note deployment does not immediately assume a release as indicated in the release-on-demand activity above. The IT service provider may deploy a release package to a live environment and not make it available for use by the customer using abstraction techniques such as feature toggles, canary releases, dark release, and blue/green release approaches. Non-Live Live Right requirements Functional and nonfunctional criteria Develop test plans Roles and Responsibilities Testing criteria Handover activities Newt technology New services Application enhancements Projects Fixes or time sensitive issues Release planning 5 Deployment readiness based on test results? Deployment Release on Demand Release Service Assurance and Testing Develop Commit Build Test Provision Deploy Release customer to Code Code Code Code Code commit commit commit commit commit Product & Service Planning, Design and Development ITAsset Management / Configuration Management 1 I t Figure 22: Deployment management

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 219 Release and Deployment Management: Purpose and Objectives Purpose: To coordinate the transition of service changes safely, effectively, and efficiently to a production environment to support business and customer value objectives Release: Enabling changes to be provisioned to end users Deploy: To: move a release into a live environment Primary objectives: To align the IT and business perspectives by coordinating the planning, testing, and To minimize an unpredicted impact on business and IT that includes production services, implementation of service changes across the organization operations, development, and support organizations Release and deployment management supports business objectives by: Reducing the risks of service disruption and ensuring service continuity Improving the quality and reliability of the IT services and enhancing customer satisfaction Aligning the IT services with the changing business needs and requirements Optimizing the use of resources and minimizing the costs of service delivery Additional key objectives of the release and deployment process may include: Planning and overseeing the successful rollout of software, hardware, documentation, Establishing communication channels for release information. notification and determining the Implementing new software releases or hardware into the live environment using the controlling processes of service assurance and testing, configuration management, and change management Successfully implementing the release in the live environment while maintaining the system's integrity and availability; ensuring there is a minimal unpredicted impact on the production Ensuring skills and knowledge are transferred to operations and support staff to enable them to effectively and efficiently deliver, support, and maintain the service according to required Coordinating with the service assurance and testing process to perform an appropriate level of user acceptance testing and pilot staging that includes the verification of rollout and back-out Developing appropriate release plans that include procedures for implementing changes to the Designing and implementing efficient procedures for the distribution and installation of changes Communicating and managing the expectations of the customer during the planning and rollout communication, and user training audiences, communication frequencies, and information services, operations, and support organizations warranties and service levels procedures live environment to IT services of new releases

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management Benefits of release and deployment management: 220 Improved stability and the resilience of test and live service environments Improved expectation setting within the organization on the publication of release schedules in Error reduction through the controlled versioning of hardware and software to the live A complete record (or audit trail) of changes to the live environment is maintained, both of Changes to IT services can be delivered faster and at an optimum cost and minimized risk. Smoother transitions of releases from the development activities (projects) to the customer's business environment through consistency in the implementation approach across the business Ag greater success: rate in the release of hardware and software and, therefore, an improved quality Al better use of IT staff resources based on the reduction of unplanned work due to the combined A minimization of the disruption of the service to the business through the synchronization of releases within packages involving hardware and software components from different platforms advance environment software distributions and of hardware changes. Contributes to meeting auditable requirements for traceability change, service teams, vendors, and customers of service delivered to the business and coordinated efforts of key stakeholders and environments

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 221 Release and Deployment Management: Policies "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's by a group of people or a business organization" goals. Policy statement Scope of documentation All releases will be fully documented from initial planning through hypercare that includes the support recording of any deviations, new or changed service and any necessary corrective action. An example policy Is: All releases and deployments must be accompanied by a comprehensive documentation package that covers the functionality, design, testing, and installation of the product. The reason for the policy This policy defines what kind of documentation is for each release and deployment such as user manuals, technical specifications, test cases, Benefits Documentation assures compliance and procedures and creates audit trails for an assessment of the release and the release and deployment management process. To optimize understanding of the release and deployment management process as well as to create a clear traceability and audit trail to assess the effectiveness of the release and deployment to the policy required risks, and issues related to the change logs, etc. control and an plan 17 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 222 Policy statement Standardization Standardized (and where possible, automated) build, provisioning, and deployment procedures/scripts will be used to compile, test, and migrate releases to appropriate environments. An example policy is: All releases and deployments must adhere to the standard release and deployment procedure defined by the organization. Knowledge transfer A knowledge transfer for customers and support staff will be developed and delivered through training and education programs. An example policy is: All releases and deployments must include a knowledge transfer session that covers the key features, benefits, risks, and issues of the product. The reason for the policy This policy ensures the release and deployment process follows consistent and repeatable steps such as version control, configuration management, testing, approval, These procedures/scripts will be clearly documented and managed as controlled software artifacts with version control within configuration management systems. This policy facilitates communication and collaboration between the developers and the operations team, as well as other stakeholders such as customers, users, vendors, etc. Benefits Ensures releases will be completed faster, more efficiently, and with a reduction in errors introduced into the live environment To standardize the release, build, and test procedures across the enterprise and gain more control and accuracy through the use of documented, automated, repeatable, and proven procedures Training provides greater customer proficiency, enhances support, and minimizes the adverse effects of change from the new or updated service. Carefully planned training and, where needed, ongoing education to optimize the customer value benefits etc.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 223 Policy statement Acceptance criteria Release acceptance and go/no go criteria will be established for each release. These criteria will include technical and nontechnical requirements and will be used to determine the approval and final closure requirements for the release into the live environment. An example policy is: All releases and deployments must pass the acceptance criteria defined by the customer and the operations team before being deployed to production. A handoff to operations Specific documentation, run books, and handover documentation such as the support model will be developed prior to deployment. An example policy is: All releases and deployments must be formally handed over to the operations team with a sign-off document that confirms the completion of the release and deployment process. The reason for the policy This policy specifies the criteria that must be met for a release or deployment to be considered successful and complete such as functionality, performance, security, usability, etc. Benefits Fewer releases that need to be backed out This policy will ensure that all the necessary steps are followed when testing the release. It will ensure the live environment is prepared to accept the release with no disruptions to the business. This policy defines the roles and responsibilities of the developers and the operations team during and after the release and deployment process such as support, maintenance, monitoring, troubleshooting, etc. A clear understanding of roles and responsibilities A defined support model established prior to deployment and the final release Any details related to known issues or defects are shared with production support roles

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 224 Policy statement Release and deployment models Appropriate release and deployment models will be used for all release and deployment plans. The reason for the policy To: reduce the risk and increase the quality of the introduction of services and changes to services Benefits Maximizes business value through the development of clear and comprehensive release and deployment Standard and tested release and deployment models provide better assurance of successful release development and deployment. plans Communication plans A communications plan standardizing communications about all release and deployment plans and go/no go criteria will be built and executed for all releases into the live environment. Examples include release schedules, handover documentation, and runbooks for operations and support Communications will be sent to the appropriate stakeholders about a change at each stage of Relevant stakeholders impacted by the release require information. about releases in a timely manner that contains the required details to enable planning, monitoring, and decision-making activities. Stakeholders will have the required information that enables each to fulfill assigned roles, responsibilities, and tasks about the release. teams. the release.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 225 Release and Deployment Management: Terms and Definitions Release classifications It is recognized that each release will be different. The number of component parts will vary between releases, as will the business impact. Releases will be categorized depending on the type and number of elements affected, the business impact, and the As in the case of change management, the release and deployment management process requires a risk based release model that identifies the appropriate requirements based on the type of release. Generally, urgency of the release. there are three types of releases  major, minor, and emergency releases: A major release: A major release is a significant update that introduces new features, enhancements, or changes to the software architecture or design. A major release usually requires extensive testing, documentation, and communication with stakeholders and users. A major release is typically classified as. high-risk with high complexity: Requires extensive planning, development, and/or acquisition, testing, and end-user training activity efforts a Risk levels are typically medium to high. A minor release: A minor release is a moderate update that fixes bugs, improves performance, or adds minor features or improvements to the existing functionality. A minor release usually requires less testing, documentation, and communication than a major release. A minor release: is typically classified as medium-risk with medium complexity: Is deployed to fix small reliability problems or execute specific functionality requirements that do not have to wait until the next major release Risk levels are typically low. An emergency release: An emergency release is an urgent update that addresses a critical issue that affects the security, availability, or functionality of the software. An emergency release usually requires minimal testing, documentation, and communication, because the priority is to resolve the issue as quickly as possible. An emergency release is typically classified as high-risk with low complexity: Is executed in conjunction with emergency changes Requires immediate execution to prevent severe customer impact and/or the loss of key business functions Risk levels are typically high.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 226 The risk-based release model The appropriate requirements based on the type of release Are fixes that require extensive planning, development, and/or acquisition, testing, and user training activity efforts Risk levels are typically medium to high. Major releases: Figure 23: Release classification Additional release types: Blue/green releases: Are deployed to fix small reliability problems or execute specific functionality requirements that do not have to wait until the next major release Riskl levels are typically low. Minor releases: Are executed in conjunction with emergency changes Require immediate execution to prevent severe customer impact and/or the loss of key business functions Riskl levels are typically high. Emergency releases: This is a technique where two identical environments are used to deploy the software  one is called blue and the other is called green. At any given time, only one environment is active and serving the users, while the other is idle and ready for deployment. When a new version of the software is ready, it is deployed to the idle environment, and then the traffic is switched from the active environment to the idle one. This allows for a fast and reliable deployment with minimal When the passive environment is made live, the deployed changes are released. downtime and risks of errors. Canary releases: This is a technique where a small percentage of users receive the new version of the software, while the rest receive the old version. This allows the developers to test the performance and feedback of the new version before rolling it out to everyone. If there are any issues or bugs, they can be fixed quickly without affecting the majority of users. Dark releases: This is a technique where the new version of the software is deployed to all users, but it is hidden from user experience. This means the users do not see or experience the new version unless they are explicitly enabled to do so. This allows the developers to test the new version in production without affecting the user experience or behavior. It also enables gradual and controlled exposure A dark release may also represent a release to a back-end system that does not have direct end The release changes a back-end system that is not directly visible to a customer. A new website is launched in the live environment, but the link has not been added to a of the new version to selected users or groups. user exposure. For example: DNS server nor has it been shared.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 227 Feature toggle: This is a technique where a feature or functionality of the software is controlled by a toggle or a switch that can bet turned on or off. This allows the developers to deploy the feature to production without releasing it to the users, and then enable or disable it as needed. This enables the faster Feature toggles are commonly used by product, engineering, and DevOps teams for canary and and safer delivery of features, as well as experimentation and feedback. dark releases. Release package: This is a technique where a set of features or updates are bundled together into a package that is deployed as a whole. This allows for a consistent and predictable delivery of software, as well as easier management and tracking of changes. However, it also requires more coordination and testing and may: introduce more dependencies and risks. Aj release package is a grouping of changes and release types. Service assurance and testing: This is an IT process that works closely with release and deployment management to establish and develop test plans to validate both the functional and nonfunctional release requirements through both automated and manual means. Results of tests are provided to change management for final authorization before release deployment: Different forms of testing: Functional acceptance tests: User acceptance tests: Production acceptance tests: Tests that the release meets the functional/feature criteria defined by the requester Tests that the release meets criteria defined or expected by the customer A test to ensure the release meets the criteria defined for the live environment: capacity testing, resource usage, reliability, monitoring, and the impact on other A test for testing a previously tested release in an integrated environment, following modification, to ensure faults have not been introduced or uncovered as Tests to ensure the backout plan associated with a release will successfully restore This is testing that uncovers vulnerabilities of the system/service and determines the data and resources are protected from possible attacks. It also ensures the software system and application are free from any threats or risks that can cause a systems Regression tests: a result of the changes made the service to its last known state a Backout testing: Security testing: negative customer impact.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 228 Functional requirements: Define the attributes of the release pertaining to the customer feature expectations of the release that will contribute directly or indirectly to the customer outcomes of the release; these same. functional requirements often form the success criteria for user acceptance Nonfunctional requirements: Define the quality, performance, risk, and cost conditions that must be met to ensure the release meets the expected criteria from both customer and non customer stakeholders; nonfunctional requirements are not related to feature expectations but rather focus on service expectations such as availability, reliability, performance, service A requirement: A statement of a condition that must be met; specifically, the condition must be Environments: The term, IT environment, refers to the infrastructure, hardware, software, and systems that a business relies on every day while using information technology (IT). Generally, testing restoration, regulatory, and security requirements, etc. met by the release deliverables three types of IT environments will be used as part of service delivery: Development environment: This is a separate environment used to create or modify IT services or applications. Development environments are not typically subjected to the Test environment: This is an IT environment that is intended to replicate the live environment to test a release before it is deployed to a live environment to lower the risk of change and provide a good test condition for the final release. Note: When using canary or dark release types, it is common to test in the actual live or production environment a Live environment: A controlled environment containing live in-use service components A rollout: A synonym for deployment; most often used to refer to complex or phased A test: An activity that verifies that a service component, IT service, capability, etc. meets its same degree of control as test or live environments. due to the lower risk of these types of release models. and used to deliver IT services to customers. deployments or deployments to multiple locations specification or agreed-upon requirements Hypercare support: A stage in the release and deployment life cycle that occurs at the end of deployment and before The service provider may also provide an elevated level of support, post-release, for an agreed During hypercare support, the service provider reviews release success criteria and service levels the service is fully accepted by the customer upon and predetermined time. to determine whether service targets can be met.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 229 Release and Deployment Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events: An approved change An authorized project or initiative An approved change and an authorized project or initiative are both triggering events of the release and deployment management process because they indicate there is a need to deliver new or updated services or components to the customers or users. The release and deployment management process ensures the changes or projects are planned, built, tested, and deployed in a controlled and consistent manner to minimize the risks and maximize the benefits of the service transition. Inputs: Regulatory, security, and other compliance criteria The change calendar Configuration records Project plans The release schedule Policies Other? The release and deployment management process is responsible for planning, testing, and implementing changes to the IT services and infrastructure. To perform this process effectively, it requires various inputs from different sources. Some of these inputs: Regulatory, security, and other compliance criteria: These are the standards and rules the organization must follow when releasing and deploying changes. They ensure the changes are aligned with the legal, ethical, and contractual obligations of the organization and its The change calendar: This is a tool that shows the planned changes and their impact on the IT services and infrastructure. It helps to coordinate and schedule the changes in a way that Configuration records: These are the records that document the current state and attributes of the service components that are affected by the changes. They provide accurate and reliable information about the service components and their relationships, dependencies, and history. Project plans: These are the documents that outline the scope, objectives, deliverables, resources, roles, responsibilities, milestones, and timelines of the projects that involve changes to the IT services and infrastructure. They help to define and manage the expectations and requirements of the project stakeholders and ensure the changes are delivered on time, within budget, and with The release schedule: This is a plan that defines the trequency, timing, and scope of the releases that contains one or more changes. It helps to align the releases with the business needs and stakeholders. minimizes any disruption and risk to the business operations and customers. quality. priorities and to optimize the use of resources and capabilities.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 230 Policies: These are the principles and guidelines that govern how the organization performs the release and deployment management process. They help to establish a consistent and standardized approach to managing changes across the organization. Triggering events Inputs An approved change An authorized project or initiative Regulatory, security, and other compliance criteria The change calendar Configuration records Project plans The release schedule Policies Other? Figure 24: Release and deployment management triggering events and inputs Release and Deployment Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: A completed release A cancelled release A completed release occurs when all the planned components of a release have been successfully deployed and verified in the target environment, and the release documentation has been updated accordingly. A canceled release occurs when a release is aborted due to unforeseen issues or risks that prevent its successful deployment or operation. In both cases, the release and deployment management process should ensure the relevant stakeholders are informed of the outcome, the lessons learned are captured and analyzed, and the release records are closed or updated in the configuration management system. Outputs: New and changed service components Change record updates Trained and ready operations and support Trained and ready users Knowledge Improvement opportunities The process has several outputs that contribute to the value creation and improvement of the service: New and changed service components: These are the service components that are part of the service or support its delivery. They are updated and recorded in the configuration management system to reflect the current state of the service.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 231 Change record updates: These are the: records that document the details and status of each change request. They are updated and recorded in the change management system to reflect the outcome Trained and ready operations and support: These are the staff members who are responsible for operating and supporting the service. They are trained and prepared to handle the new or Trained and ready users: These are the customers and users who consume the service. They are trained and informed about the new or changed service and its benefits, features, and usage. Knowledge: This is the information and understanding that is created and shared during the release and deployment process. It includes technical, operational, business, and user knowledge Improvement opportunities: These are the areas where the service or the process can be enhanced or optimized. They are identified and recorded during the release and deployment and impact of the change. changed service and its potential issues. that can be used to improve the service or support its delivery. process based on feedback, measurements, reviews, or audits. Terminating event Outputs Ac completed release Acancelled release New and changed service components Change record updates Trained and ready operations and support Trained and ready users Knowledge Improvement opportunities Figure 25: Release and deployment management terminating events and outputs

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 232 Release and Deployment Management: Themes and Activities The primary themes of release and deployment management: Planning: This involves defining the scope, objectives, schedule, resources, risks, and stakeholders of release and deployment. It also involves identifying the requirements, dependencies, and constraints of The coordination of release and deployment: This involves communicating and collaborating with the relevant parties such as developers, testers, users, customers, vendors, and service managers. It also involves managing the transition of the release and deployment from one environment to another such Validation and review: This involves verifying that the release and deployment meet the agreed-upon requirements, quality standards, and acceptance criteria. It also involves evaluating the performance, effectiveness, and impact of the release and deployment on the service and the business. release and deployment, as well as the expected outcomes and benefits. as development, testing, staging, and production. Release and deployment planning: Comprehensive and holistic planning is a critical success factor when establishing an effective release and deployment management process. The following aspects are key areas that support the planning The release and deployment management process involves planning for various aspects that affect the quality, timeliness, and efficiency of delivering a new or updated service to the customers. Some of the theme. planning considerations: Service continuity requirements: These are the expectations and standards for ensuring the service remains available and functional during and after the release and deployment process. They include identifying the potential risks, impacts, and mitigations for any service disruptions Acceptance criteria (pass/fail): These are the measurable and verifiable outcomes that determine whether the release and deployment process has met the agreed-upon objectives and requirements. They include defining the success criteria, test cases, and validation methods for Planning for pilots: These are the trials or experiments that test the feasibility, functionality, and performance of the new or updated service in a limited or controlled environment before rolling it out to the wider customer base. They include selecting the pilot group, setting the scope and Release packaging: This is the process ofl bundling and organizing the components and resources that make up the new or updated service into a coherent and consistent package that can be easily deployed and managed. It includes defining the release unit, versioning, configuration, and or failures that may occur. each stage of the process. duration, and evaluating the feedback and results. documentation.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 233 Build, test, and deploy: These are the activities that transform the release package from a design to a deliverable product that can be installed and activated on the target environment. They include compiling, integrating, verifying, validating, and transferring the release package Logistics and delivery planning: These are the arrangements and preparations that ensure the release package is delivered to the right place, at the right time, and in the right condition. They include scheduling, coordinating, communicating, transporting, and storing the release package. Customer timelines and business periods: These are the factors that influence when and how the new or updated service can be deployed to the customers without causing undue disruption or inconvenience. They include aligning with the customer's expectations, preferences, The resource capacity for new work: This is the availability and allocation of the human, financial, technical, and physical resources that are needed to execute the release and deployment process. It includes estimating, planning, securing, and managing the resources according to the Financial constraints: These are the limitations and restrictions that affect how much money can be spent on the release and deployment process. They include budgeting, forecasting, tracking, Regulatory requirements: These are the rules and regulations that govern how the release and deployment process must be conducted in compliance with the relevant laws, standards, policies, and best practices. They include identifying, understanding, applying, and documenting the Vendor contracts and dependencies: These are the agreements and relationships that involve external parties that provide products or services that are essential for the release and deployment process. They include negotiating, contracting, monitoring, managing, and resolving any issues Maintenance windows: These are the predefined periods of time when the release and deployment process can be performed with minimal impact on the service availability and performance. They include scheduling, communicating, executing, and restoring the service according to the predefined standards and procedures. availability, and operational cycles. demand and priority of the process. controlling, and reporting on the costs of the process. regulatory requirements for each stage of the process. or conflicts with the vendors. during these windows.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 234 The following table represents a high-level set of activities for release and deployment management process: Activity Planning: Develop the release and deployment plan. Description Developing a release and deployment plan requires working with the customer and product management team. This activity includes planning for the short-term activities and looking forward through the entire release and deployment life cycle. This ensures appropriate planning and mechanisms The release and deployment plan should consider the following release are considered and/or in place from the beginning. aspects. Release planning considerations: Customer timelines and business periods The resource capacity for new work Financial constraints Regulatory requirements Vendor contracts and dependencies Maintenance windows Service continuity requirements Acceptance criteria (pass/fail) Planning for pilots Release packaging Build, test, and deployment Logistics and delivery planning The output of the release and deployment planning activity is provided as input into the product and service planning, design, and development process for inclusion in the product backlog planning and prioritization process. Outputs from this activity are also provided to the service assurance and testing process.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 235 Planning: Plan and prepare for deployment. This activity uses the deployment plans from the original release planning activity and updates them based on new or changed requirements from the development and testing phases. The release team will prepare the timing, approach, and automation requirements for deploying the release into a live As part of the deployment activity, the following steps may be considered. Conducting the deployment assessment early on and periodically Results are fed into, and adjustments made to, the detailed and/or production environment. Go-live assessment: throughout the release implementation planning approach. The readiness assessment for the deployment group identifies issues and risks as well as gaps that need to be closed before a final approval may be Develop the plans and automation approach as well as prepare for given for the decision to deploy the changes. deployment: Assigning specific resources to perform deployment activities, develop automation options, and provide early life-support activities Identifying and assessing risks and identifying business and service critical assets that have the highest risk of causing a disruption Ensuring plans include mitigation strategies and rollback options Release acceptance criteria: Release acceptance criteria are the inputs from key stakeholder groups related to the requirements for release validation and testing. These requirements ensure a release meets its functionality as well as the nonfunctional requirements for the IT service provider and customer. The following topics are examples that may be considered for inclusion in release acceptance: 1. System description: a Does a full description exist of the business functionality for this Have the potential business risks to the existing system(s) been Is there documentation for all the business capabilities and a Is there a description of the system capabilities? application? documented? procedures? 2. Technology details: How: is this application going to interface with other current systems and applications?

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 236 Is there any software that has to be installed or upgraded to Is there any hardware that has to be installed or upgraded to Is there a tclecommunications technology that has to be installed or upgraded to support the new application? Will this application require inspective and proactive a Do any changes have to be made to the standard user What will the platform and operating system be? a What is the support coverage available from the vendor? Is it possible to visit other sites where this application has already been installed? Is there a temporary secure holding area for items support the new application? support the new application? maintenance? workstation configuration? awaiting packaging and shipment? 3. New application functionality: What are the expected performance norms for this release? Is there a user manual or other documentation on how to use the Is there any information available on potential problems or Are there any documented resolutions to anticipated a Is there a complete list of system error messages? a Are there examples of user screen layouts? new application? known issues? problems/known issues? 4. Customer community details: What is the number of users by Apartmenudivisovlcalin that a What are the names and contact details for the user communities Has the potential user community growth been identified for this Will users have remote or VPN access, etc. and, if sO, how will What service desk contact methods will be used by the users? What are the knowledge and skill levels of the users? Has the support model been established? D What is the availability of support personnel? will have access to this new application? contact staff? application? these function in the application? 5. Incident management details: What is the procedure for contacting support staff outside of Have all the names and contact details for the second-level regular business hours? support staff been obtained?

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 237 Activity Description What contact methods are going to be used? Do any new data fields need to be created in the existing service a What is the expected percentage of incidents that should be Can any scripts or workflows be created to enhance incident Are there clearly defined escalation priorities? Are there documented escalation procedures? What external support services are available? management tool? solved at the first-level support? solving? 6. External support services: a What is the procedure for contacting external support services? Are maintenance contracts in place for hardware and software? What are the report layouts and information required by the What is the reporting frequency required by the customer? What is the method to be used to send customer reports? a What are the report layouts and information required by IT a What is the reporting frequency required by IT groups? What is the method to be used to send IT group reports? a What service levels have been promised or are expected by the What is the risk level or ceriticality-to-business capabilities? What are the service desk hours of coverage required by the When does the customer require communication on open issues? a What is the expected response time for outside support services? What security access levels will be authorized for support a What security requirements does the application have? a Are there regulatory requirements for this release? Has the application been tested and hardened to security What is the capability for detecting and handling a security 7. Reporting requirements: customer? groups? 8. Service level requirements: customer? customer? 9. Security considerations: personnel? standards? incident?

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 238 Activity of release and deployment: Perform the transfer, deployment, and retirement. Description plan: The coordination The following activities will be undertaken as specified in the deployment Transfer financial assets: agreements. Financial costs include new license costs and updates to vendor Transfer/transition and training to customer and/organization: This may involve organizational change that includes changes to the organizational structure, roles and responsibilities, and relevant Any business and/or organizational changes require effective communication to encourage the adoption of those changes. Publish documentation and updated service catalog entries: knowledge and skills training. Materials that include new policies, capabilities, and procedures need to be published and deployed to customers, users, and service providers. New or changed service offerings need to be updated in the service catalog. Deploy service support models: New or changed support models, systems, and tools need to be developed and deployed to all service providers who are required to operate and support the new or changed service. Deploy the service to the live environment: Distribute and install the new or changed service components to the live environment Decommissioning and service retirement: replaced by the new or changed service Decommission or retire any service or service component that has been

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 239 Activity The coordination of release and deployment: Release on demand. Description Release on demand indicates the timing and cadence of when a release is The release may be scheduled based on the customer agreed-upon schedule or placed in a software store for the customer to pull the release In some cases, the deployment and final release activities may made available to the service consumer. when ready: occur at the same time; for example: If the customer agrees the deployment and release for use activities should not be phased When the product or service being released is a supporting or indirect service and does not directly impact customer experience In the case where an IT service provider is providing services to a general market and the customer organizations are not engaged in release planning Once all the deployment activities are complete, it is important to verify that all stakeholders, customers, users, and service operations are capable of using or supporting the service prior to its final release. Report any issues or Hypercare support is used to transition the service smoothly and in a controlled manner with a goal to provide resources to quickly resolve operational and support issues immediately following the release. During early life support, the service provider reviews the release success criteria and service levels to determine if the service targets can be met. The service provider may also provide an elevated level of support, post-release, A review of the release and deployment activities should be conducted to ensure all the activities were completed, and quality criteria were met. Any issues, risks, problems, and known issues should be documented and A release is finalized upon completing the final handover for ongoing Validation and review: Verify deployment. Validation and review: Provide hypercare support. incidents where corrective action is necessary. for an agreed-upon and predetermined time. Validation and review: Review and close the deployment. accepted by the appropriate stakeholders. operations and support to service operations.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 240 Release and Deployment Management: Actors and Roles Release and deployment actors: The deployment coordinator: This is the person who is responsible for planning, coordinating, and executing the deployment activities across different environments (such as development, testing, staging, and production). The deployment coordinator works closely with the developers and quality assurance, test, and operations teams to ensure the deployment is done in a timely, Developers and quality assurance, test, and operations teams: These are the teams that are involved in the development, testing, and operation of the products or services that are being released and deployed. They follow the agreed-upon standards, procedures, and guidelines for their respective activities, and they collaborate with each other and with the deployment The release coordinator: This is the person who is responsible for planning, coordinating, and executing the release activities across the different products or services that are being released and deployed. The release coordinator works closely with the release and deployment stakeholders to ensure the release is done in accordance with the release policy, plan, and schedule and thati iti meets the quality criteria and expectations of the customers and stakeholders. Release and deployment stakeholders: These are the people who have an interest or a stake in the release and deployment management process. They include the customers, users, sponsors, managers, vendors, regulators, auditors, etc. They provide input, feedback, approval, or support for the release and deployment activities, and they receive information, communication, or Agile teams: These are the teams that follow the Agile methodology for developing and delivering products or services that are being released and deployed. They work in short iterations or sprints, and they deliver incremental value to the customers and stakeholders. They adopt a flexible and adaptive approach to changing requirements, feedback, and priorities. DevOps teams: These are the teams that adopt a DevOps culture for developing and delivering products or services that are being released and deployed. They integrate development and operations activities into a continuous cycle of delivery. They use automation. tools and practices to accelerate the release and deployment process. They foster a collaborative and transparent All the capabilities encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include: efficient, and effective manner. coordinator to ensure a smooth transition from one environment to another. training about the release and deployment outcomes. culture of trust, learning, and improvement. The release management manager Much of the work performed in the release and deployment activities will be carried out by other key stakeholders such as the product owners and project team and the quality assurance and testing roles. The release manager is focused on ensuring a consistent and appropriate approach to release planning is followed by all key stakeholders.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 241 The resources responsible for the execution of backouts for failed or canceled releases, as well as resources to provide the initial support in response to incidents and problems, must be identified. In addition to the generic responsibilities of the manager role, there are various key responsibilities: Ensuring management and other capabilities are provided with necessary inputs Coaching release management coordinators in the correct use of the capability Evaluating and updating the communications plan to maintain its effectiveness throughout the Reviewing and initiating the appropriate action to ensure all the parties involved are familiar with and follow the capability policies and activities that include external vendors Promoting and communicating the capability to all parties involved release and deployment life cycle Reviewing and providing information. for reports Ensuring the release management capability operates effectively and efficiently, including: The release package design, build, and configuration The release package acceptance, including the business sign-off The service rollout planning, including method(s) of deployment The release package testing to the predefined acceptance criteria The sign-off of the release package for implementation a Ensuring standardized methods and techniques are used for the preparation, building, testing, and implementation to meet service levels and prevent change-related incidents identifyingimproement opportunities to ensure the capability and tools are effective and Functioning as a point of escalation for release and deployment analysts Identifying training requirements efficient Release and deployment  functional specialists: Many release and deployment activities are executed by a release team made up of subject matter experts from key stakeholder groups and teams. The release team is made up of staff across the IT functional Individuals on release teams are referred to in this section as release and deployment management process analysts.' They are responsible for ensuring that they and their peers within their functional All release teams are accountable to follow and comply with the release and deployment process activities, policies, and procedures. These teams are accountable to the release and deployment management process manager and will be called upon to execute the operational workload required for In addition to the generic responsibilities of the analyst role, some key responsibilities include: departments according to the skills and knowledge required for the specific release. departments use the process correctly. planning, building, testing, and deploying as well as the final release. Providing the initial performance reporting and undertaking a service risk assessment based on When required, performing timely backouts for failed or cancelled releases and restoring the live performance service and dependent components back to normal operations

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 242 Providing the initial support in response to incidents and problems detected within a new or Following the release and deployment management process, procedures, work instructions, and changed IT service Being a subject matter expert in his or her specific technology area or domain Updating or providing information regarding release and deployment issues required documentation Identifying opportunities fori improvement Ensuring the release and deployment management process is applied correctly within the Coordinating release and deployment activities with other sections and/or departments Identifying possible bottlenecks and issues regarding release and deployment and communicating them to the release and deployment coordinator/manager The adaptation and improvements of release elements that evolve with the initial usage, such as user documentation, support documentation, and data management department/section Release and Deployment Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Service changes are deployed and released within the agreed-upon time frames and budgets. KPIS: The percentage of service changes that are completed on time within budget: The number of service changes that are completed on time and within budget The percentage of service changes requiring rework due to changed requirements The number of service changes with updated requirements The number of total service changes The number of service changes CSF: A repeatable process for managing effective and efficient releases KPIs: The percentage increase in new releases planned and controlled by release management The percentage reduction in the number of failed releases based on release acceptance The percentage reduction in the percentage of emergency or urgent releases The percentage reduction in the number ofi incidents caused by releases criteria

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 243 CSF: Cost-effective releases KPIs: The percentage increase for releases built and implemented within budget The percentage reduction in releases backed out The percentage reduction in the average cost ofl handling a release The percentage increase in the accuracy of release estimates CSF: Manage releases effectively based on business and customer needs. KPIS: The increased percentage of releases built and implemented on schedule The percentage reduction in the number of defects reported post-release The percentage increase in the successful completion of training plans The percentage reduction in the average number of days deployment plans were delayed Release and Deployment Management: Integrations The following describes key areas where release and deployment management integrates with other processes. Change management Release and deployment management is the process of planning testing, and implementing changes to IT services. It aims to ensure changes are delivered in a controlled and efficient manner, minimizing disruption and maximizing benefits. Change management is the process of controlling the life cycle of all changes from initiation to closure. It ensures changes are evaluated, authorized, prioritized, planned, tested, implemented, documented, and reviewed in a standardized way. Incident management is the process of restoring normal service operation as quickly as possible after an incident while minimizing the impact on business operations and ensuring quality. Configuration management is the process of identifying, tracking, and maintaining the service components that make up an IT service or system. The process integrations needed between release and deployment management and change management: Release and deployment management should align with the change management policy and procedures and follow the change authorization process for any planned changes. Release and deployment management should provide accurate and timely information to change management about the status, schedule, risks, and dependencies of releases and deployments. Release and deployment management should coordinate with change management to ensure changes are communicated to relevant stakeholders and that any conflicts or issues are resolved.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 244 Release and deployment management should report to change management on the outcomes and performance of releases and deployments and participate in change evaluation and review activities. Incident management: management: The process integrations needed between release and deployment management and incident Release and deployment management should monitor the incidents related to releases and deployments and provide support and guidance to incident management teams. Release and deployment management should analyze the root causes of incidents caused by releases and deployments and implement corrective actions to prevent recurrence. Release and deployment management should collaborate with incident management to identify and prioritize any emergency changes that are required to resolve incidents or restore service. Release and deployment management should inform incident management of any planned or ongoing releases or deployments that may affect the resolution or recovery of incidents. Configuration management: The process integrations needed between release and deployment management and configuration management: Release and deployment management should use the configuration management system as the source of truth for the current state and relationships of service components involved in releases Release and deployment management should update the configuration management system with any changes made to service components during releases and deployments to ensure the Release and deployment management should verify that the service components deployed match the service components authorized by change management and report any discrepancies or Release and deployment management should consult with configuration management to identify any potential impacts or dependencies of releases or deployments on other service components and deployments. configuration records are accurate and complete. deviations to configuration management. or services. Additional integrations: IT asset management: Release and deployment management uses IT asset information to identify existing hardware and software, their attributes, and their technical owners tobe involved in the release and deployment Release management is responsible for providing or making updates to IT asset records through activities. the release life cycle.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 245 Problem management: Release and deployment management provides information to problem management regarding any known defects or errors and potential workarounds that are part of a release. This in turn is Problem management will follow up with release and deployment management for the Release and deployment management will oversee the planning and execution of problem Release and deployment management will inform problem management about problem Problem management will inform release and deployment management about any process and/or deployment tool errors discovered during root cause analysis activities and will collaborate with release and deployment management to determine appropriate problem Release and deployment management will inform problem management to update problem records for known issues removed as a result of successful deployments and releases. shared with incident management. elimination. of the known problems associated with a release. requested releases and deployments. requested release and deployment statuses and outcomes. solutions. Service level management: Service levels will be considered during release planning and scheduling. Following a release, updates may be required to existing service agreements. Identifies whether a release can be made without violating service level agreements (SLAs). Cyber, security, and risk management: Security develops, implements, and manages security controls that include software, data, and technical infrastructure controls to ensure the safe and secure operation of the live environment. Security must review all releases before implementation in the live environment. Additional software or hardware modifications to the release or to the live environment may be required to ensure the proper system security is maintained following implementation.

Chapter 11: Release and Deployment Management 246 Release and Deployment Management: Enablers Some possible process enablers for release and deployment management that focus on technology and resources: Automated deployment tools Configuration management systems Release management software Testing and verification tools Communication and collaboration platforms Some resources that are necessary to effectively run a release and deployment management process are: A team of skilled and experienced release and deployment managers, engineers, testers, and A reliable and secure data repository for storing and managing release and deployment artifacts A sufficient and flexible budget for acquiring and maintaining the necessary tools, infrastructure, A clear and consistent communication plan for informing and engaging with the relevant parties involved in the release and deployment process such as customers, users, developers, and stakeholders such as code, configuration files, documentation, and test results and resources for release and deployment activities vendors Some possible process documentation for release and deployment management are: Release policy: Defines the objectives, scope, principles, roles, and responsibilities for release and Release plan: Describes the schedule, resources, dependencies, risks, and quality criteria for each Deployment plan: Specifies the activities, tasks, roles, and responsibilities for deploying a release Release notes: Provide information about the features, fixes, known issues, and dependencies of Deployment checklist: Verifies that all the prerequisites, steps, and post-deployment checks are deployment management release to the live environment ai release completed successfully

Chapter 12: Service Assurance and Testing Service Assurance and Testing: Purpose and Objectives The service assurance and testing process focuses on the effective and efficient testing of potential changes. This is achieved by evaluating potential changes from both a customer value and risk-based standpoint. The primary objective is to ensure these changes function as intended and avoid any A business or customer-focused approach to service assurance and testing focuses on aligning assurance and testing efforts with the overarching customer objectives. By closely integrating testing endeavors with the broader business context, this process validates that the services being developed meet the specific needs and desired outcomes outlined by the business, thereby assuring the alignment of the Service assurance. and testing works closely with other processes such as release and deployment, knowledge management, and change management to deploy and release new or modified service, Purpose: The purpose of service assurance and testing is to enable new or modified services and solutions to be implemented safely and securely in line with agreed-upon stakeholder expectations and outcomes This is achieved in part by identifying requirements and related service assurance and testing criteria established during the planning and design activities of a product and/or service life cycle. Defined significant issues upon release into live or production environments. service's functionalities with the overarching strategic goals. solutions, and products. related to functional and nonfunctional requirements. requirements may be classified into two broad categories: Functional requirements: Include product and service features that are expected by customers Nonfunctional requirements: Include product and service attributes such as availability, Using the defined service acceptance criteria, service assurance and testing establishes testing plans to ensure the final approval to deploy the release through change management has the required information necessary to authorize the deployment and release activities based on acceptable test results. reliability, performance, resilience, continuity, regulatory, and ease of use

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 248 To achieve these goals, the objectives of this process include: Establishing a holistic set of assurance and acceptance criteria from key stakeholder groups such as the customer, enterprise architecture, information security, operations, and production Establishing a testing plan and approach for both functional and nonfunctional requirements Evaluating and approving test results as input into change and deployment management Ensuring releases are ready for promotion to live environments with stakeholder readiness and Ensuring releases are promoted successfully without major problems, are stable, and meet the Performing post-implementation reviews to assess the effectiveness of assurance and testing Ensuring lessons learned from test results and subsequent releases are used as input into support related to the planned change based on the defined acceptance criteria and the level of organizational risk activities support expectations of all stakeholders plans and activities continuous improvement Example benefits of service assurance and testing There are several qualitative and quantitative benefits that can be achieved for both the IT service providers and the customers by implementing an effective and efficient service assurance. and testing process. Benefits to IT service providers: Improved business and customer satisfaction with the value provided by the IT service provider The improved collaboration of key stakeholder groups and processes through a holistic approach Improved test planning, design, and coverage that results in test case development and reuse Adopting a risk-based testing approach aimed at reducing risk to the service and the customer's business while rightsizing the level of testing plans and activities to support organizational Integrating testing into other IT service management activities such as project, software development, security, and release and deployment management; this helps to detect and remove functional and nonfunctional defects as soon as possible and reduces the incidents in the live Establishing test measurements and monitoring systems to improve the efficiency and Engaging with customers, stakeholders, users, and service teams throughout the project and service life cycle enhances testing skills and the ability to capture feedback on the quality of A lower level of rework and unplanned work, post-release, reduces the spend on contingency to service assurance and testing The reduction of unplanned work after the change or release has gone live mission goals environment effectiveness of service assurance and testing. services. and remediation costs.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 249 Benefits to customers: Improved change and release effectiveness, efficiency, and security that results in an improved Satisfies the business's accountability for regulatory, compliance, and security requirements Establishes a standard and consistent method to balance the need for growth and production Provides an established degree of confidence that a new or changed service can deliver the value Provides an understanding of the risks associated with the implementation of a new or changed Successful collaborative testing that involves customer stakeholders increases business, customer, customer business value realization related to the separation of duties stability and outcomes required service and user confidence. Service Assurance and Testing: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"is "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement Separation of duties All tests must be designed and carried out in such a way to remove any conflict of interest. The reason for the policy The separation of duties is central to ensuring objective testing and is a key governance and audit requirement. This may be accomplished by using people resources not involved in design/build activities or through the means of automated controls. Benefits Ensures business value derived from the service in production Ensures an objective decision as to whether or not to proceed with deployment Ensures the documentation of test failures and known issues 18 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 12: Service Assurance and Testing 250 Policy statement Requirements-based testing Test plans and test cases must be developed based on predefined service assurance criteria that balances organizational requirements and risk. The reason for the policy Test planning should be based on predefined assurance criteria and rightsized based on the level of the risk of the change/release. Benefits Test plans and test activity will be holistic and consider both functional and nonfunctional requirements. Will ensure the appropriate stakeholders are involved in defining acceptance criteria Will ensure the level of testing will match the level of risk Establishes service and service value expectations prior to development work Provides objective and business-focused criteria for test planning Eliminates subjective assessments and decisions by testers Ensures the business value is derived from the service in production Protects and ensures the integrity of the test environment(s) Increases the reliability of test results Improves the decision making ability for change management to authorize deployment Defined pass/fail criteria Test pass/fail criteria must be documented as part of the service assurance and acceptance criteria before the start of any testing. Baseline targets establish the business requirements for the service and ensure that adequate testing is designed and planned to validate these requirements. Live and testing environment Similar environments ensure synchronization Test environments must replicate intended live environments before testing is started. that the testing replicates the live environment.

Chapter 12: Service Assurance and Testing 251 Policy statement Reusable test cases Service assurance and testing will identify, create, and maintain a library of test cases and models that can be reused for testing. The reason for the policy The nature of IT service management is repetitive and benefits greatly from the reuse of standard models. Benefits Improves the productivity and efficiency of test planning Ensures a better to meet increasingly quicker test times and test cycles Ensures the consistency of test performances for all releases Increases the reliability of test results Ensures the business value is derived from the service in production Instills a culture of testing as part of service deployment Ensures adequate time is planned for the deployment of fully tested service releases Sets proper expectations of the business/customer and improves the capability for on-time deployment capability Test integration Service assurance and testing practices must be integrated into the project, release, change, and knowledge management processes. Improves the understanding and clarity that the appropriate level of assurance and testing should be included in any level of the design/build, deploy, and release life cycle Service Assurance and Testing: Terms and Definitions Acceptance: This is a formal agreement that an IT service, process, plan, or other deliverable is complete, accurate, reliable, and meets its specified requirements. Acceptance is usually preceded by user acceptance testing and is often required before proceeding to the next stage of a project or process. Acceptance criteria: Thisis a set of criteria used to ensure an IT service meets its: functionality and quality requirements, and that the IT service provider is ready to operate the new IT service when it has been deployed. Service acceptance criteria comprise the primary input into the test plan and test case Application: This is software that provides functions that are required by an IT service. Each application may be part of more than one service. An application runs on one or more servers, computers or clients. development.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 252 Architecture: This is the structure of a system or. IT service that includes the relationships of components to each other and to the environment they are in. Architecture also includes the standards and guidelines Build: This is the activity of assembling a number of service components to create part of an IT service. The term, build, is also used to refer to a release that is authorized for distribution. Also see the definition Deployment: This is the activity responsible for the movement of new or changed hardware, software, documentation, process, etc. to the live or production environment. Also see the definition for rollout. Development: Relative to software development management, the role or function that carries out the Development environment: A controlled environment where applications, IT services, and other builds Environment: A subset of the IT infrastructure that is used for a particular purpose; for example: a live Live environment: A controlled environment containing live service components and is used to deliver Test: Testing is comprised of methods, concepts, procedures, and techniques that verify and validate that a product, solution, or service satisfies predefined acceptance criteria and business requirements. Automated versus manual testing: Ideally, due to the nature and complexity of IT products and services, many of the tests can and should be automated to support quality, speed, and repeatability. Automated tests also have the advantage in that they reduce any conflict of interest and increase the objectivity of the test results. However, some tests such as user acceptance or usability tests must be completed that guide the design and evolution of the system. for development. development or build work are assembled prior to being moved into a test or live environment or production environment; test environment; development environment; etc. IT services to customers manually for the results to be meaningful and acceptable. Different forms of testing: Unit testing; The testing of individual software components or modules; typically done by the developer because it requires detailed knowledge of the internal program or code Verifying that important features or modules are working and that there are no barriers Smoke testing: to subsequent development or testing phases Integration testing: System testing; The testing of integrated modules to verify their combined functionality a The entire system is tested, which includes applications interacting with hardware, databases, and network connectivity, and other hardware and appliances are required. This is sometimes referred to as end-to-end testing.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing Functional acceptance tests: User acceptance tests: 253 Tests that the release meets the functional/feature criteria defined by the requester These are tests to ensure that the release meets the criteria defined in the use cases. These are tests to ensure the release meets the criteria defined for the live environment: capacity testing; resource usage; reliability; and monitoring; as well as the impact on other Production or live environment acceptance tests: systems. Regression tests: These are to ensure faults that have been previously removed are not reintroduced as a result of the changes made. Load testing: a This is a performance check to assess the system's behavior under load. Load testing or stress testing, determines at what point a system's response time degrades. a A system is stressed beyond its design specifications to check how and when it fails. Stress testing: Usability testing: Backout testing: a User experience, workflow, and navigation is tested. Tests to ensure the backout plan associated with a release will successfully restore the service to its last known state. Security testing: Testing that uncovers vulnerabilities of the system/service and determines that the data and resources are protected from possible attacks. It ensures the software system and application are free from any threats or risks that can cause customer impact. Test coverage is defined as a measurement that determines to what degree test plans and cases are covering the product and service acceptance criteria. The degree to which test coverage is in place is a primary determiner of the level of risk related to a release. The higher the coverage, the lower the risk. A test case and test scenario: A test case represents specific instructions or automated scripts that can be developed and used to test a particular function or feature of an application. A test scenario is a high Test-driven development: Test-driven development (TDD) is a software development practice that focuses on creating unit test cases before developing the actual code to support the functional requirement. This practice improves the degree of test coverage and results in a higher quality of level description of how a specific function or feature of an application should work. development activities that are conducted to satisfy the predefined test.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 254 A test environment: This is a controlled environment used to test products, solutions, and IT services that are as similar to the live environment as possible but are not connected to it. An important note is that release practices such as the use of feature toggles or canary or dark releases enable some testing to be performed in production or live environments without impacting the customer or user experience. A test plan: This is a detailed plan that establishes the appropriate test strategies, objectives, schedule, estimations, deadlines, and resources required to complete a testing approach. It should be based on the captured acceptance criteria and sized appropriately based on risk. Service Assurance and Testing: Triggering Events and Inputs Service assurance and testing process activities may be triggered by a series of different events. These triggering events prompt various types of testing activities to maintain the product and service quality, reliability, and functionality throughout its development and maintenance life cycle. Triggering events: Product or service code changes/updates Development milestones New feature implementation Bug fixes The integration of products and services New requirements Environment changes Security updates Scheduled test cycles Product or service code changes/updates: Whenever new code is added, modified, or updated within the software, it often triggers regression testing or specific tests to ensure the changes haven'tintroduced Development milestones: The completion of specific development phases or milestones such as the end of coding, module integration, or feature implementation may trigger corresponding testing phases. New feature implementation: Introducing new features or functionalities prompts testing to ensure they Bug fixes: After resolving reported bugs or issues, testing is triggered to verify the fixes and ensure they Thei integration of products and services: When different modules or service components are integrated into the software system, integration testing becomes necessary to validate their interactions. New requirements: Any updates or additions to the software requirements often necessitate Environment changes: Moving the software to a new platform or environment (e.g, different operating systems, hardware configurations, or deployment platforms) triggers compatibility and environment new issues. function as expected and do not adversely affect existing features. haven't caused new problems elsewhere in the software. corresponding testing to ensure the software meets the updated criteria. specific testing.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 255 Security updates: Updates or changes to security protocols, standards, or requirements typically trigger Performance optimization: Changes aimed at improving software performance may trigger Scheduled test cycles: Regularly scheduled testing cycles, such as regression testing after each sprint or security testing to ensure the software's resilience against potential threats. performance testing to validate and measure the software's efficiency. iteration in Agile development, are often predefined triggering events. Examples of key inputs in a service assurance and testing process would include: Inputs: Business goals and objectives Regulatory and license requirements Cyber and security requirements Vendor and external supplier requirements Knowledge management artifacts Software development standards Architecture standards Test data Test cases and scripts Service assurance criteria (functional and nonfunctional requirements) Business goals and objectives: These are the specific targets and aims a company sets to achieve within a defined period. Goals are broader and long-term, while objectives are specific and measurable steps Regulatory and license requirements: These encompass rules, laws, and certifications that a business must adhere to in its operations. Compliance ensures the company meets legal standards and industry Cyber and security requirements: These refer to the specifications and measures implemented to protect Vendor and external supplier requirements: These outline the criteria, qualifications, and expectations a company sets for third-party vendors to ensure they meet quality, reliability, and delivery standards. Knowledge management artifacts: These are documents, databases, or repositories containing valuable information, experiences, and best practices collected and shared within an organization to facilitate Software development standards: These are guidelines and best practices that dictate the processes, methods, and tools used during the development of software to ensure quality, consistency, and Architecture standards: These define the principles, guidelines, and best practices for designing and implementing the structure and components of software or system architecture to ensure scalability, toward achieving those goals. regulations. digital systems and data from unauthorized access, cyberattacks, and breaches. learning and decision-making. maintainability. reliability, and maintainability.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 256 Service assurance criteria (functional and nonfunctional requirements): Functional requirements describe the specific functions a system or software should perform, while nonfunctional requirements Test data: Refers to the data used to execute tests that includes input values, expected results, and other Test cases and scripts: Test cases are detailed descriptions of test scenarios, conditions, and expected outcomes, while test scripts are lines of code or instructions that automate the execution of test cases. focus on qualities like performance, usability, security, and scalability. necessary information to validate the functionality and behavior of software. Triggering events Inputs Product or service code changes/updates Development milestones Newf feature implementation Bugf fixes Thei integration of products and services Newr requirements Environment changes Security updates Scheduled test cycles Business goals and objectives Regulatory and license requirements Cyber and security requirements Vendor and external supplier requirements Knowledge management artifacts Software development standards Architecture standards Service assurance criteria Test data Test cases and scripts Figure 26: Service assurance and testing: triggering events and inputs Service Assurance and Testing: Terminating Events and Outputs The following list provides examples of terminating events and outputs from the service assurance and testing process. Terminating events: Completed test results provided to change management Defects captured and logged for remediation Test results for go/no-go decisions inputs to continuous delivery automation. A feedback loop with customer and other stakeholders on test results A feedback loop with vendor or partners on the performance of their solutions Completed test results provided to change management: This involves sharing comprehensive summaries or reports of test outcomes, including successful tests, issues found, and their severity. These reports aid change management in making informed decisions about approving or rejecting software Test results for go/no go decisions inputs to continuous delivery automation: Test results play a pivotal role in the decision-making; process for implementing continuous delivery automation. They serve as crucial inputs that determine whether a software release should proceed or halt (go/no-go decision). changes based on the test results.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 257 In the context of continuous delivery automation, these test results act as pivotal checkpoints. Positive outcomes, indicating the software meets the necessary quality standards and aligns with predefined criteria, serve as the green light (go decision) for the automated deployment process. Conversely, if significant issues, critical bugs, or failures are detected, prompting concerns about the software's readiness or stability, a red light (no-go decision) is signaled. This halts the automated deployment process, preventing the release of potentially faulty or unstable software into production environments. Defects captured and logged for remediation: When issues or bugs are identified during testing, they are documented in a defect tracking system. These records contain details such as the defect description, steps to reproduce, the severity level, and status that facilitate the remediation process. A feedback loop with customer and other stakeholders on test results: This involves sharing test results, reports, and findings with customers and relevant stakeholders. It allows them to understand the quality and readiness of the software, gather their input, and align expectations regarding the product's A feedback loop with vendor or partners on the performance of their solutions: When testing involves third-party solutions or integrations, providing feedback to the vendors or partners on the performance of their solutions is essential. This loop ensures they are aware of any issues encountered and can performance and functionality. collaborate to address them effectively. Outputs: Completed test plans Refined test cases Test script creation Defect reports Improved test data Traceability matrix completion Performance metrics schedule for the testing process. Completed test plans: These documents outline the results of the overall approach, scope, resources, and Refined test cases: Detailed descriptions of scenarios, conditions, inputs, and the expected outcomes Test script creation: Lines of code or automated instructions that execute test cases automatically, often Test reports: Summaries or detailed reports generated after test execution that provide insights into test Defect reports: Documentation of identified issues or bugs within the software that includes details like Improved test data: Updated datasets or inputs used during testing to validate different functionalities used to validate specific functionalities or features of the software used in automated testing results, issues found, and overall test coverage severity, the steps to reproduce, and status (open, resolved, closed) or scenarios

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 258 Traceability matrix completion: A document that maps test cases to requirements to ensure the test P'erformance metrics: Measurements and analytics gathered during performance testing such as coverage aligns with the specified requirements response times, throughput, and resource utilization Terminating events Outputs Completed test results provided to change management Test results for go/no-go decisions inputs to continuous delivery automation Defects captured and logged for remediation Afeedbackl loop with customer and other stakeholders on test results Afeedback loop with vendor or partners on the performance of their solutions Completed test plans Refined test cases Test script creation Defect reports Improved test data Traceability matrix completion Performance metrics Figure 27: Service assurance. and testing: terminating events and outputs Service Assurance and Testing: Themes and Activities The primary high-level themes of a service assurance and testing capability focus on key areas that encompass the overall testing process to ensure comprehensive and effective testing practices. Some Testing strategy and planning: This comprises developing an overarching approach and comprehensive test plans that align with business goals and objectives. This includes defining testing objectives, the scope, resources, timelines, and risk management strategies. Key activities of test planning would include test design and development. These activities focus on creating detailed test cases, scripts, scenarios, and datasets to validate different aspects of the software to cover functional and nonfunctional requirements. Test execution and automation: This comprises implementing testing processes, executing test cases manually or through automation tools, and managing test environments efficiently. Test execution primary high-level themes: focuses on different testing areas: Functional and nonfunctional testing: Testing features and product and service attributes Performance and security testing: Conducting specialized testing to evaluate performance, Risk-based testing: Prioritizing testing efforts based on risk assessment to focus on critical areas Compliance and standards testing: Ensuring adherence to industry standards, regulatory required from both customer and technology stakeholders scalability, load handling, and security aspects of the software and the potential impact on business objectives requirements, and best practices in testing methodologies and techniques

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 259 Defect management and reporting: Capturing, documenting, prioritizing, and tracking defects or issues Communication and continuous improvement: Establishing feedback loops for stakeholder communication and continuous learning and improvement of testing processes, methodologies, tools, and techniques The following activities are examples ofl high-level activities of the service assurance and testing process. Testing strategy In this activity, the inputs into the process are used to capture and define the found during testing; generating reports on test progress, results, and defect metrics Activity and planning: Acceptance and requirements criteria capture Description acceptance and test requirements: and expected supported outcomes Stakeholder functional requirements such as product and service features Stakeholder requirements for nonfunctional requirements such as availability, reliability, performance, resilience, continuity, regulatory, and the ease of use Examples of acceptance criteria include: Acceptance and requirements examples Functionality Criteria Completeness (e.g coverage of the customer requirements) Correctness (e.g. known issues, escaped defects) Connectivity (e.g., an ability to connect to necessary data feeds and Conversion (e.g-, Previous data sources are correctly and accurately Data protection (e.g., confidentiality, integrity, and availability) Access control (e.g-, intrusion proof and restricted access) Data transactions (e.g-, encryption and the management of Traceability and observability (e.g., the monitoring and logging of sources) converted and/or imported.) Security cryptographic keys) exceptional activities) Performance Processing times (e.g, batch transactions) Response times (e.g, one transaction and time-outs) Network speed (e.g, the network transactional speed) Processing capacity (e.g., the number of transactions in a certain time)

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 260 Acceptance and requirements examples Maintainability and supportability Criteria Abstraction (e.g., built using loosely or tightly coupled architecture Support model (e.g, defined support model, runbooks, and escalation procedures in place) Testability (e.g., the degree of test coverage) The availability, frequency, and method of vendor updates, upgrades, and support Stability (e.g., the vulnerability and probability of a component impact failure based on the fault tolerance design) Service continuity (e.g, recovery time objective (the amount of time the business can be without the services needing recovery) or recovery point objective (the most recent point in time from which Backout plans are established and tested as required in the need to Controls: (e.g., Manual and automated controls have been established in compliance with regulatory requirements. (FDA and/or Sarbanes-Odly-elewant releases will require more stringent testing documentation; e.g., physical sign-off). License compliance: (e.g-, Product and service releases are compliant with current license agreements.) Architectural standards: (e.g., The product and service changes meet the architectural design requirements.) approaches) Availability and resilience data can be recovered) fall back to a previous steady state. Regulatory and compliance

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 261 Activity Testing strategy and planning: Test planning and test case design Description This process activity is focused on developing an overall testing plan design as well as verifying test plans, scenarios, and test cases. Test plans can initially be developed during service design and refined through release planning discussions and finalized as part of the service assurance and It is important to compare the customer/business requirements to the actual service design to ensure what the customer is expecting can and will be delivered. As such, the test plans and designs must be verified against the service acceptance criteria for a particular service change or release. Specific test scenarios are established based on classes of acceptance criteria: testing process. Functionality Security Performance Supportability Availability Regulatory Based on the defined scenarios, test cases and/or scripts are identified for development that are supported by automated and/or manual testing activities. This activity should ensure that: profile of the service The test plan delivers adequate and appropriate test coverage for the risk The test scenarios cover the key integration aspects and interfaces The test cases and scripts are accurate and complete The test types are adequate for the release Test planning considers test preparation that includes the installation and/or update of a defined test environment with prepared test input data that establishes clear definitions of the test acceptance criteria for go/no-go decisions. Additional considerations include how to report and deal with error handling, correction and escalation, and final approval.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 262 Activity automation: Test case development and execution Description Test execution and Test case development is the activity where a tester or a testing team creates a set of test cases based on the design and planning step. The test cases typically include input data and expected output, as well as preconditions and post The tests are then carried out using automated and/or manual techniques and procedures. Testers must record their findings during the tests. If a test fails, Testing should continue according to the test plans and scripts if possible. When part of a test fails, the defect or issues identified should be resolved or documented (e.g., as a known issue) and the appropriate retests should be performed by the same tester(s). This should be done in accordance with test The results of the tests are then compared to the expected output, and any discrepancies are logged as defects or bugs that need to be addressed by the Test case development and execution is an iterative process, and the test cases are continually refined and updated as new issues are discovered and fixed. When testing software, identify any issues that stop the software from note details like the problem description and how to recreate it, as well as its conditions for the test. the reasons for the failure must be fully documented. plans and as decided by the test manager. development team. Defect reporting: Capture and log in the product backlog. management and working as expected. Document these issues using a standard template to risk and severity level. defects for inclusion Assign each issue a unique identifier and categorize it based on its risk and impact to the product goals. Decide how urgent each issue is and how important it is to fix. Share these identified issues with the development team, SO they're added to the list of things to work on (the product backlog). Review and track recorded defects and issues regularly, updating their progress and letting everyone involved know about any changes. Test execution and The test cases are executed or run, and the actual results are compared to the automation: Test execution; results analysis and reporting expected results. The results may be interpreted in terms of pass/fail and or go/no-go decisions based on the risk to the business/service provider or if there is a change in a projected value; e.g-, a higher cost to deliver intended benefits. To produce the report, gather the test metrics and summarize the Ensures the business customers and/or IT stakeholders evaluate the outcome for the testing process as determined by the test plan; remediates significant errors identified in the testing process and provides input into change management as to whether to approve the release to the live environment results of the tests.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 263 Activity Communication and continuous improvement: learned Overall, this final importance of and adaptation within the testing process. By reviewing lessons learned, updating testing artifacts, maintaining test environments, and communicating effectively, teams can continually Description take place: In the final step of the service assurance and testing process, which involves communication and continuous improvement, several actions and activities Review and lessons Review test case results: Analyze the outcomes of executed test cases comprehensively. This involves examining whether the tests met their objectives, identifying any anomalies or unexpected behaviors encountered during testing and validating if the software behaves as expected according step emphasizes the to defined criteria. reflection, learning, Identify lessons learned: Evaluate the testing process, test cases, scripts, and datasets to extract valuable insights and lessons. This includes understanding what worked well and what didn't, identifying patterns of recurring issues or challenges, and pinpointing areas where improvements can be made. Revise test cases, scripts, and datasets: Based on the lessons learned, update accuracy, coverage, or relevance. This might involve adding new test scenarios, modifying existing ones, or enhancing test data to better simulate Reset test environments; Ensure test environments are restored to their original state or configured appropriately for subsequent testing phases. This involves resetting configurations, clearing data, and to replicate consistent and controlled conditions for future testing results, identifying or refine test cases, scripts, and datasets to improve their effectiveness, real-world scenarios. environments cycles. preparing refine their testing Communication: Share the insights, lessons, and updated testing artifacts practices to lead to (test cases, scripts, datasets) with the testing team, development team, and improved software stakeholders. This communication aims to disseminate knowledge gained quality and more efficient testing cycles in the future. from the testing process and to ensure alignment among teams regarding Continuous improvement planning: Develop a plan to implement the identified improvements in the testing process. This could involve setting up new strategies, adopting better tools or methodologies, providing additional training, or refining existing processes to enhance overall testing efficiency improvements and changes made. and effectiveness.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 264 Service Assurance and Testing: Actors and Roles The following actors and roles are key contributors and stakeholders in the service assurance and testing Service assurance and testing owner: This individual has responsibility for defining, implementing, and maintaining the overarching testing framework and standards within the organization. Their role involves establishing testing strategies, methodologies, and guidelines. They oversee the entire testing process to ensure its alignment with industry best practices that drive innovation and foster continuous improvement initiatives. Additionally, they collaborate with various stakeholders to ensure testing activities meet the business objectives, regulatory requirements, and quality benchmarks. The process owner also provides leadership and guidance to testing teams to ensure effective coordination, resource Testing team: The testing team comprises testers, quality assurance engineers, and testing leads responsible for executing test cases, scripts, and scenarios. Their activities involve designing, executing, and reporting test results to ensure software functionalities align with requirements and standards. Development team: The development team includes software developers and architects responsible for building and maintaining the software. Their involvement in testing revolves around providing inputs on design, reviewing test cases, fixing identified defects, and collaborating with testers to understand Project managers: Project managers oversee the testing process's planning, coordination, and resource allocation. They facilitate communication among teams, manage timelines, and ensure testing activities Business analysts/product owners: Business analysts or product owners represent the business or client interests. They define requirements, prioritize features, and validate that the software aligns with business objectives. They participate in validating test cases against the business needs and providing Customer stakeholders: Customer stakeholders, including clients or end users, have a vested interest in the software's performance and quality. They provide input on requirements, review test results, and Quality assurance (QA) managers: QA managers oversee the overall quality assurance strategy to ensure testing processes comply with established standards and best practices. They guide teams in implementing efficient testing methodologies, oversee. test planning, and ensure adherence to quality IT operations: IT operations teams focus on the production handover documentation, runbooks, and support models necessary for the operational readiness of the software. Their primary concern lies in ensuring the smooth transition of software into live compute, hosting, network, and storage production environments. They are responsible for maintaining system stability, scalability, and reliability once the process. allocation, and adherence to established testing protocols. and resolve issues. align with project objectives and milestones. feedback on test outcomes. offer feedback on the software's functionality and usability. benchmarks. software is in operation.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 265 Release and deployment management: Collaborates closely with service assurance and testing teams to provide valuable input into the testing process. They offer insights related to customer requirements, prioritization of product features, and timing based on business goals and objectives. They contribute to validating the software's readiness for release and ensure the deployment aligns with strategic business Vendor/third-party partners: Vendors or third-party partners may provide software components or services integrated into the system. Their involvement includes ensuring the compatibility, performance, Each of these stakeholders plays a critical role in ensuring the effectiveness, quality, and alignment of the service assurance and testing process with the business goals and customer requirements. Their collaboration and contributions are essential for delivering high-quality software products or services. All processes encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles, along with priorities and customer needs. and reliability of their solutions within the overall software ecosystem. their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process. Service assurance and testing manager In addition to the generic manager role responsibilities, they have specific responsibilities: The testing manager is responsible for ensuring products, solutions, and services are deployed and released effectively, efficiently, and securely. They design tests, manage testing resources, and gather testing data. They work with a team to conduct testing procedures. They recruit software testing staff, schedule testing activities, create budgets for testing, and prepare test effort estimations. They help design test plans, scenarios, and test cases. They identify test datasets during the service design stage to ensure appropriate and adequate coverage and control. They allocate and oversee test resources to ensure test policies are adhered to. They plan and manage support for service testing tools and processes. They manage test environment requirements. They provide management reporting on the test's progress as well as test outcomes, success rates, They) provide input on the development and review of SLAs, contracts, agreements, and any other They ensure all IT service provider vendor processes such as software development, project management, release and deployment management, and knowledge management are aligned to They monitor, report, and regularly review service assurance and testing performance against targets, identify improvement actions, and ensure these actions are implemented. issues, and risks. documents for vendors related to testing. and are integrated with the service assurance and testing process.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing Service assurance testing analyst/tester 266 Responsibilities: Performs requirement and gap analyses on acceptance criteria completeness The creation of test scenarios, test processes, test cases, and test data Develops automated testing scripts and solutions Prepares input data for test scenarios and cases Carries out testing as per the defined procedures Participates in walkthroughs of testing procedures Prepares reports related to the testing activities carried out Ensures all tested-related work is carried out as per the defined standards and procedures Performs defect reporting and logging and captures known issues As a subject matter expert, updates the knowledge base with relevant artifacts Service Assurance and Testing: Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Acceptance criteria and requirements are captured for both functional and nonfunctional requirements as inputs into test planning. KPIS: The percentage increase of stakeholders satisfied with the completeness of the The percentage decrease in the number/percentage of tests performed where acceptance criteria used as input into test planning stakeholder acceptance and sign-off was not received CSF: Test plans and test coverage adequately cover the complete list of defined acceptance criteria based on risk. There is a clear definition of success/fail and go/no-go criteria defined to support objective test analysis. KPIS: The percentage increase of projects with a documented and approved testing plan The decrease in the number of releases not ready for release on schedule CSF: Key stakeholders use a consistent approach to test planning, execution, and reporting. The service assurance and testing process is integrated with other key IT service management processes. KPIs: The decrease in the number of findings being identified in the service assurance and The increase in the percentage of errors found during testing and service assurance testing process by internal or external audits activities

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 267 CSF: Accurate decisions are made to promote releases to a live environment that do not result in service outages or incidents. KPIs: The increase in the percentage of stakeholders satisfied with the quality and results of The decrease in the percentage of releases causing production issues and/or impacts to The decrease in the number of changes approved without the testing results sign-off the releases being moved to live environments service availability and performance (downtime) CSF: Testing reports and lessons learned are used to continually improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the service assurance and testing process. KPIs: The number of lessons learned or improvement opportunities identified for future The number and percentage of root cause analyses being completed after failed releases testing plans and activities Service Assurance and Testing: Integrations As indicated at the start of this chapter, service assurance. and testing works closely with a number of other IT service management processes to ensure changes and releases are executed effectively, efficiently, and securely. Examples ofl key process integrations: Release and deployment management information. and provide feedback for: Service assurance and testing will work closely with release and deployment management to share Release planning details regarding intended schedules, deadlines, and constraints that are The requirements and recommendations related to the identification of acceptance criteria and provided as inputs into test planning activities the definition of pass/fail or go/no-go thresholds Information on updated test plans, constraints, and dependencies The documented issues experienced in testing with recommendations The documented validation and sign-off of all tests The requirements for executing test scenarios and cases that are shared

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 268 Change management Change management's goal of ensuring changes are appropriately authorized and scheduled is dependent on service assurance and testing attesting to the quality and the readiness of the release for deployment. This decision requires the output, results, and recommendations for go/no-go as well as the following examples: The evaluation of test results against acceptance criteria and the input to the change authorization The documented validation and sign-off of the stakeholders that provide initial acceptance The documented issues and known issues that come out of testing activities in relationship to criteria change authorization Pass/fail of tests Ai recommendation on whether to deploy the change/release Ensuring that a tested and validated backout plan is in place Knowledge management Service assurance. and testing creates test scenarios, cases, and scripts that can be reused for future releases. It also depends on key information from a variety of other sources such as external parties, regulatory requirements, etc. This information should be captured and made available as part of knowledge management and could include: Documented guidelines and templates Workarounds from problem management Organizational standards for documentation and defect tracking Known issues coming into the testing process or subsequently being discovered Mechanisms to ensure knowledge related to tests are periodically reviewed, refreshed, and, when Additional key integrations toi note would be a close relationship with information security management, necessary, retired configuration management, and project management to name a few.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 269 Service Assurance and Testing: Enablers The following are key enablers for an effective service assurance and testing process: Tools and technologies: These are essential enablers in service assurance and testing due to their ability to streamline, automate, and enhance various aspects of the testing process. Test automation tools significantly reduce a manual effort, improve testing coverage, and expedite repetitive tasks, thereby increasing efficiency and accuracy in test execution. Performance testing tools allow for the simulation of real-world usage scenarios to enable the identification of system bottlenecks and ensure the software's scalability and robustness. Defect tracking systems provide a centralized repository for managing identified issues and facilitating effective communication and resolution among testing and development teams. These tools empower testing teams to conduct comprehensive and effective testing to lead to Service assurance and testing relies on automation. to support planning, resource management, scheduling, and test case. automation. The following list represents examples of technology requirements higher-quality software products and more efficient testing cycles. for this process: Functional testing: This type of testing checks that the software performs its basic functionalities correctly. Automated functional tests are used to test the user interface, application logic, and Test planning and reporting is supported by resource planning tools, collaboration tools (for The management of software-defined environments that include the setup and management of development and testing environments is supported by both orchestration and provisioning Test planning and test case development are dependent upon knowledge related to standards, forms, and reusable test scenarios and plans that are maintained within a knowledge base. Load testing is used to test the performance of software applications under different load conditions. These tools can be used to simulate different types of load conditions such as high Capturing test defects for remediation and retesting is supported by defect tracking automation. Test analysis and reporting requires the support of testing automation packages that enable Automated security and compliance testing is used to ensure software applications meet security and compliance requirements. These tools can be used to scan applications for vulnerabilities, to Test cases and scripts are often software artifacts that must be stored in a software repository that database interactions. content management), and chat communication. automation. Manual test scripts, checklists, and forms are stored within a knowledge base. traffic, heavy usage, and peak loads. reporting, trend analysis, and a dashboard creation. identify compliance issues, and to generate reports on the results of the tests. supports version control.

Chapter 12: Service. Assurance and Testing 270 Resources: The availability of skilled resources and appropriate test environments is crucial for the success of service assurance and testing endeavors. Skilled testing teams possess the expertise to design comprehensive test plans, execute test cases effectively, and analyze test results accurately. Access to well-configured test environments that closely resemble production setups ensures tests are conducted in conditions that reflect real-world scenarios and accurately validate the software's behavior. Continuous training programs and skill development initiatives keep testing teams updated with the latest methodologies, tools, and industry best practices to enhance their capabilities to deliver high Processes: Defined processes and methodologies play a pivotal role in service assurance and testing by providing structure, guidance, and repeatability to testing activities. Testing methodologies and frameworks, such as Agile, DevOps, or shift-left testing, offer structured approaches to planning, execution, and collaboration among cross-functional teams to promote early defect detection and rapid feedback cycles. Well-documented test plans, test cases, and comprehensive documentation ensure systematic test coverage to reduce ambiguity and ensure critical functionalities are adequately tested. Continuous improvement processes, such as feedback loops and retrospective meetings, foster a culture of learning and enhancement within testing teams to allow them to adapt, refine, and optimize testing quality testing outputs. practices.

Chapter 18: Monitoring and Alerting Monitoring and Alerting: Purpose and Objectives Monitoring and alerting (MA) is focused on understanding, managing, and improving the ability of IT resources, systems, products, services, and their related service components to support intended business value, results, and outcomes. This is accomplished through the identification and logging of events for contextualization and appropriate actioning and alerting. Examples of event actions include taking remedial actions to minimize incidents, making changes, and providing historical data and trend Purpose: The purpose of monitoring and alerting is to enable the planning and execution of real-time observability, historical analysis, and predictive insights into the status and health of IT systems, The MA process works with service design and service assurance. and testing to establish requirements related to observability, the logging of events, alert definition, and communication. Its focus is to enable the capture and alerting of the real-time monitoring of information, as well as to store sufficient historical information to reconstruct and review periods of time and historical snapshots of the IT environment to Captured events are contextualized based on defined rules and aggregated with follow-up actions that are predefined to trigger and support manual and automated IT service management workflow actions in processes such as incident management, change management, security management, and service MA helps to ensure deployed services are operated, maintained, and supported in line with the service analyses to satisfy regulatory requirements as well as optimizing IT service value. products, and services resulting in timely communication and appropriate actions. support operations and service improvement. continuity management. level agreement (SLA) targets agreed-upon between the business and IT. The objectives of monitoring and alerting In summary, the objectives of the MA process include: Defining service monitoring and event logging and alerting requirements Establishing service assurance and testing requirements for observability and alerts Defining event types and predefined follow-up service management process actions Establishing alert recording, logging, and retention polices Defining alert and communication policies and follow-up actions

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 272 Defining requirements for product and service monitoring automation Providing visibility into the health of service components, products, and services Helping to understand trends in usage or behavior and to understand the impact of changes Ensuring all relevant information from service monitoring and event detection is acted upon by made the appropriate people and processes Conducting continuous monitoring Storing historical information for analysis, traceability, and nonrepudiation Supporting trend analyses and continuous improvement The importance of effective service monitoring cannot be overemphasized. If a service can't be monitored, it can'tl be measured, and if it can't be measured, it can't be managed. Benefits to the IT service providers: Improved requirements'generation for service design, service assurance, and testing requirements to ensure observability, traceability, and nonrepudiation requirements are A better ability to predict service failures and increase the responsiveness to actual service An improved ability to proactively manage warning events prior to a service outage or anomaly Providing visibility into the health of products and services to help understand trends in usage Reduced labor costs due to the automation. of routine operations management activities triggered Better and up-to-date data to compare the actual performance and service or component behavior A better use of resources through event monitoring by anomaly, thus removing the need for More control over IT services through knowledge of the service and component status An improved incident management process through automatically escalating status changes or anomalies to the appropriate person or team to perform an early response Better management and control of vendor products and services through event monitoring considered early incidents as they arise, thus minimizing business impact occurring orl behavior and to understand the impact of changes made by events against standards and SLAs labor-intensive real-time monitoring Benefits to the customers: Detecting and resolving issues before they affect performance, availability, and the user An improved security response through the rapid identification of security breaches and/or A reduced business impact through the early detection of incidents, thereby increasing Ai reduction in actual service breaches, thereby reducing the impact of downtime on the business A reduced total cost of ownership (TCO) because of automating routine work and eliminating IT: is better aligned to real-time business priorities and can allocate resources as necessary. experience cyberattacks availability manual resource-intensive activities

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 273 Improved user and customer satisfaction because of higher service availability and performance (capacity) Monitoring and Alerting: Policies by a group of people or a business organization" "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement One approach The reason for the policy Provide uniform, effective, and in support of overall IT service optimization Benefits Simplified data collection Clearer accountability across the IT organization Uniform management information Optimal resource utilization Consistent criteria for defining and handling events High event credibility Outage risks are minimized during event processing. Only the most valuable monitoring is implemented. Event responses are well planned and understood, which increases their effectiveness. One MA process based on the efficient MA activity execution ITSM best practices will be utilized throughout the organization. Required event and alert criteria No monitoring shall be implemented unless it has defined alert policies and criteria that invoke a defined event action. A clear definition of alert policies and event action criteria will limit the scope of MA to the events with the highest priority; this prevents the deployment of noise alerts or false alarms. 19 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 274 Policy statement The reason for the policy ownership must be clear and limited only to those who are accountable for responding to Benefits Appropriate communication Alert recipients and event Accountability for the event response is clear. The risk of accidental collisions between responding parties is reduced. A reduction in coordination communication overhead Drives continuous MA improvement Alerts and events will be presented only to the party expected to act on them or to key stakeholders that need to know of their occurrence. Incident correlation MA will periodically attempt to match anomaly events to incidents to identify event follow-up opportunities and event quality issues. Event and process documentation Automated actions taken in response to an event are to be associated with the appropriate process record. Standard formatting To the extent possible, all event notifications and alerts submitted by MA shall be in a uniform event format. Where possible, use open standards such as (SNMP or WMI formatting). Improved correlation An analysis and improvement of event correlation shall be performed by the technology group as close to the source of the event as possible. the event. To ensure events are managed and maintained appropriately To ensure all necessary information. is available for event, incident, change, and problem managers to complete their activities Improved communication Ensures traceability and nonrepudiation requirements are recorded and documented A record of actions taken A reduced processing load Reduces the number of formats to be supported at the monitoring system/console A uniform event format distributes the event notice formatting overhead across the computing platforms and reduces the transformation overhead at the central monitoring system. Fewer correlation factors need to be taken into account, and the probability that invalid events are correctly suppressed is increased. Protects the event credibility Improves the clarity and accuracy of the event classification and contextualization

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 275 Monitoring and Alerting: Terms and Definitions Alert: An IT alert is a notification that is sent when an event occurs that requires attention from IT processes and staff. Alerts can be generated by monitoring systems that are designed to detect issues with hardware, software, or network devices. Alerts can be sent via email, SMS, or other messaging systems. Timely IT alerts are important because they allow IT staff to respond quickly to issues and AIOps stands for artificial intelligence for IT operations. It's an approach that combines artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) technologies with IT operations to enhance and automate various aspects of managing and optimizing IT infrastructure that includes monitoring, troubleshooting, and decision-making processes. AlOps aims to improve efficiency, detect anomalies, and enable Agent: A monitoring agent is a software program that is designed to collect, analyze, and report data on the performance and behavior of computer systems, networks, applications, or devices. It operates in the background, monitoring the system or device and tracking the system or device data such as CPU utilization, memory usage, network traffic, and system uptime. When certain thresholds or anomalies are detected, the monitoring agent can trigger alerts or notifications to administrators or users, enabling Agentless monitoring is a type of monitoring that does not require the installation of an agent on the system being monitored. Instead, it uses protocols like SNMP (simple network management protocol) or WMI (Windows management instrumentation) to collect data from the system. Agentless monitoring is Anomaly: An event that represents a variance from an expected system, product or service characteristic, Business process monitoring is the practice of monitoring business processes and their corresponding transactions (e.g, payroll management) to ensure they are running efficiently and effectively. Continuous monitoring is a process and automated approach to MA that detects issues and risks in an organization's systems, products, and services. It involves constantly scanning and analyzing data from various sources to identify and address events in real time. Continuous monitoring supports efficient and effective operations, security, and compliance. It is part of a risk management strategy and Event: An IT event is an occurrence that requires attention; IT events can include job completions, hardware failures, software errors, security breaches, and other issues that are related to or impacted by Event rules: Rules used by the MA process to filter, correlate, enrich, and act on event notifications Event correlation: Refers to the process of analyzing and identifying relationships between various minimize downtime. proactive responses in complex and dynamic IT environments. them to take corrective actions promptly. often used in environments where installing an agent is not possible or desirable. impaired functionality, or degraded performance framework. the performance or availability of IT systems. events or alerts generated by different parts of an IT infrastructure.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting Event correlation aims to: 276 Identify patterns: It looks for patterns and dependencies among multiple events or alerts from Reduce noise: It helps in reducing the noise created by numerous individual alerts by grouping related events together, thus providing a more concise and manageable set of actionable insights Prioritize and contextualize: By understanding the relationships between different events, it prioritizes incidents based on their impact on the system to provide context to help IT teams focus Automate responses: With AlOps, event correlation often involves leveraging machine learning and AI algorithms to automate responses or suggest potential resolutions based on historical different sources such as servers, applications, networks, and databases on critical issues patterns and known solutions Informational (event): An event that does not require any action and does not represent an anomaly Monitoring: Monitoring is the process of collecting, contextualizing, aggregating, and analyzing events occurring within service components, products, and services using a monitoring solution. Types of monitoring At the highest-level, there are four types of monitoring activities: 1. Reactive This comprises a service component such as an application, database, or infrastructure device (server, storage, network, etc.) that sends a message to a monitoring system 2. Proactive  This is when a monitoring system polls a service component to identify if it is operating according to expected characteristics, is compliant with security policies, and reflects 3. Predictive  Based on historical event data, the future health of a service component, product, 4. Synthetic  This is a technique used in both the service assurance and testing as well as monitoring and alerting processes. A set of predefined tests are conducted to simulate user behavior and interactions with an application or system. Synthetic monitoring is typically automated and conducted at regular intervals to provide continuous feedback on the performance of the application or system. This enables the ability to monitor the application's performance over time and identify trends and patterns that may indicate underlying issues. Each type of monitoring has strengths and limitations. Reactive monitoring tends to offer the most specific diagnostics and immediate need for action; for example, a virtual server signals that it is about to run out of disk space. However, if the application crashes or powers off, it is no Proactive monitoring solves this limitation by polling the service component at predetermined intervals. During each poll, the monitoring system queries the website, application, or device regarding expected characteristics. While this solves the issue of reactive monitoring, it also has the potential to create significantly more network traffic and load on the device. when some form of event occurs. the standard and approved configuration. and/or service is extrapolated using a predictive trend analysis. longer able to send a reactive signal.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 277 To address this issue, reactive monitoring is combined with proactive polling to resolve this issue; this enables effective monitoring while limiting the impact of too much polling. While reactive and proactive monitoring are the norm, they are only partial solutions. Predictive monitoring is a type of monitoring that uses machine learning algorithms to extrapolate or predict potential issues before they occur. This is supported by AIOps (artificial intelligence for IT operations), which is at technology that combines big data and machine learning algorithms to automate IT operations. AIOps can. helpidentify issues before they impact websites, servers, and applications by using predictive analyses and anomaly detection. By using AIOps for predictive monitoring, organizations can reduce downtime and improve their system availability. This information provides input into IT service management processes such as Predictive analyses use. logged events and workflow record data to look for early signs of failures. This approach has been used with great success in other industries. The commercial nuclear industry has deployed predictive analyses to help detect issues and false alarms as well as weather prediction models that use past event data to model and predict storms, earthquakes, Monitoring system/console: A monitoring system is software that helps system administrators monitor their CIs'products and services. These tools monitor system devices, traffic, and applications, as well as Reactive monitoring: The reception and processing of operational alerts or communications generated Response team: The set of technical performers that are charged with responding to a specific form of Threshold: This is a configurable value used to denote predetermined levels that trigger a warning type Warning: This is an event that is generated when a service or device is in a state that justifies investigation service level management, problem management, and change management. and other natural events. issue an alert in the event of malfunctions and a disruption. by monitored service components an event of event when thresholds are exceeded. and, perhaps, corrective action to prevent an unacceptable increase in risk. Monitoring and Alerting: Triggering Events and Inputs There are a number of triggering events that may initiate activities within the monitoring and alerting process including: Triggering events: Service downtime Performance degradation Security threat detection Resource utilization. thresholds Application errors or crashes Configuration changes

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting Infrastructure failures Anomalies in user behavior Compliance violations Scheduled jobs or tasks 278 Service downtime: When a service becomes unavailable or experiences disruptions beyond acceptable P'erformance degradation: Significant slowdowns or decreases in response times for applications or Security threat detection: Identification of potential security breaches, malware, or unauthorized access Resource utilization thresholds: Exceeding predefined limits for CPU, memory, disk space, or network Application errors or crashes: Instances where applications encounter errors or unexpectedly terminate Configuration changes: The detection of unauthorized or unexpected alterations to configurations that Infrastructure failures: Hardware failures, server crashes, or network outages that impact operations Anomalies in user behavior: Unusual user activities or access patterns that might indicate security risks Compliance violations: Instances where systems or services deviate from regulatory or internal Scheduled jobs or tasks: Alerts related to the success or failure of routine maintenance tasks, backups, There are a variety of sources of input into the planning, design, execution, and responses to the thresholds services attempts bandwidth might affect system stability or security or misuse compliance standards or updates monitoring and alerting process. Inputs: Business objectives Vendor management contracts Regulatory and legislation License requirements Service level agreements Business continuity requirements IT; governance and resources management policies Security and risk requirements related to auditability, traceability, and nonrepudiation Service design criteria for functional and nonfunctional requirements Business objectives: The monitoring and alerting process in IT services, products, and components directly align with the organization's business objectives. It ensures alerts prioritize issues that directly impact these objectives to maintain business continuity and efficiency.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 279 IT governance and resource. management policies: The framework and allocation of resources for monitoring and alerting systems are guided by IT governance and resource management policies. These Vendor management contracts: Vendor contracts include specifications for monitoring requirements, particularly in service-level agreements (SLAs). These agreements detail the vendor's responsibilities in monitoring and alerting to ensure their accountability in maintaining service standards. Regulatory and legislation/license requirements: The monitoring process adheres strictly to regulatory and licensing stipulations. It ensures compliance with legal obligations and licenses by alerting for any Security and risk requirements (auditability, traceability, nonrepudiation): Monitoring systems are designed to address security and risk concerns by providing audit trails, traceability, and nonrepudiation. They immediately trigger alerts for any security breaches or suspicious activities. Service level agreements (SLAs): The monitoring process is built to meet the metrics outlined in SLAs to ensure service quality and uptime are monitored and maintained. Alerts prioritize issues in alignment Service design criteria (functional and nonfunctional requirements): This covers functional and nonfunctional requirements. It defines monitoring criteria around design requirements and ensures Business continuity requirements: Critical to business continuity, monitoring systems proactively detect any potential disruptions. Alerts are triggered promptly to ensure continuous business policies ensure the strategies implemented comply with organizational guidelines. potential violations. with these commitments. alerts are defined for effective management and continuous improvement. functionality in the event of anomalies. Triggering events Service downtime Performance degradation Security threat detection Resource utilization thresholds Application errors or crashes Configuration changes Infrastructure failures Anomalies in user behavior Compliance violations Scheduled jobs or tasks Inputs Business objectives IT governance and resources management policies Vendor management contracts Regulatory and legislation License requirements Security and risk requirements related to auditability, traceability, and nonrepudiation Service level agreements Service design criteria for functional and nonfunctional requirements Business continuity requirements Figure 28: Monitoring and alerting: triggering events and inputs

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 280 Monitoring and Alerting: Terminating Events and Outputs Termination events within the monitoring and alerting process for IT services, products, and resources signify the conclusion or resolution of an issue or alert. Terminating event examples: Issue resolved Escalation Automated remediation Confirmation of mitigation Confirmation of investigation Acknowledgement Issue resolved: Confirmation that the identified issue or incident has been resolved and normal operation Escalation: When an alert or issue is escalated to a subject matter expert or higher-level management Automated remediation: Instances where automated systems or scripts have successfully resolved the Confirmation of mitigation: When measures have been taken to mitigate the impact of an issue to ensure Confirmation of an investigation: An indication that the reported alert has been thoroughly Acknowledgement: Acknowledgment that the alert or issue has been received, reviewed, and deemed As well as a series of excepted terminating events, the monitoring and alerting process will produce the has been restored team for further action or decision-making problem without human intervention its effects are minimized investigated, and findings or actions have been documented not critical or a false positive following example outputs. Outputs: Event logs Trend and forecasting reports on utilization and capacity Informational dashboards (security, performance, availability, functionality) Information on changed service components, products, and services Information shared with service level management regarding service level targets and agreements Information. shared with security and risk management Event logs: Event logs serve as a comprehensive record of all monitored activities and alerts within the IT environment. These logs capture timestamped details of incidents, system changes, errors, and responses. They provide a chronological overview of events to aid in post-incident analysis, troubleshooting, and compliance audits.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 281 Trend and forecasting reports on utilization and capacity: Reports on utilization and capacity trends offer insights into resource usage patterns over time. These reports outline historical data, predict future resource needs, and highlight potential bottlenecks. By analyzing these trends, IT teams can make informed decisions regarding resource allocation, scaling, and infrastructure planning. Informational dashboards (security, performance, availability, functionality): Dashboards provide real-time visual representations of key metrics related to security, performance, availability, and functionality. These user-friendly interfaces offer at-a-glance insights into the status of IT services. For example, a security dashboard might display threat levels, while a performance dashboard could showcase server response times that enable a quick assessment and action based on the displayed data. Information on changed service components, products, and services: Details on changed service components, products, or services highlight alterations made within the IT environment. This information includes updates, configurations, installations, or modifications. Tracking these changes ensures documentation and visibility that aids in understanding the impact of alterations on overall Information shared with service level management regarding service level targets and agreements: Information shared with service level management includes reports, metrics, and insights related to meeting service level targets and agreements. This data demonstrates the performance against agreed upon metrics that highlights successes or the areas needing improvement. This communication aids in decision-making and contract renewals, as well as ensuring alignment with service level commitments. Information shared with security and risk management: Data shared with security and risk management encompasses insights into security-related events, vulnerabilities, and incidents detected through monitoring. This information assists in assessing and mitigating risks, implementing preventive measures, and ensuring compliance with security protocols and regulations. Sharing this data enables system performance and stability. informed decision-making regarding security strategies and risk mitigation plans. Terminating events Issue resolved Escalation Automated remediation Confirmation of mitigation Confirmation ofi investigation Acknowledgement Outputs Event logs Trend and forecasting reports on utilization and capacity Informational dashboards Information on changed service components, products, and services Information shared with service level management regarding service level targets and agreements Information shared with security and risk management Figure 29: Monitoring and alerting: terminating events and outputs

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 282 Monitoring and Alerting: Themes and Activities Key themes of the monitoring and alerting process: Planning and designing The planning and designing monitoring and alerting process is a critical activity of IT operations. It involves careful forethought and the consideration of various factors to create an effective framework and process for identifying, responding to, and managing various types of events within an IT infrastructure. This theme revolves around strategizing theimplementation of monitoring tools, defining alert thresholds, and structuring workflows to ensure an optimal response and communication. As part of this theme, the organization defines its objectives, aligning monitoring goals and alerting with broader business objectives and specific service level agreements. It involves outlining what needs to be monitored, which metrics are crucial for performance evaluation, and what thresholds trigger alerts. Designing encompasses choosing the right tools or systems capable of collecting and processing relevant Planning and designing monitoring and alerting systems involves predicting scalability and adaptability requirements. Systems should be flexible enough to accommodate future expansions, technological An integral part of this theme is considering usability and the user experience. It involves designing user friendly interfaces and dashboards for monitoring and alerting to ensure the information presented is actionable and understandable by the intended audience, such as IT operators, engineers, or business This theme emphasizes a proactive approach by preemptively addressing potential issues through careful planning to ensure the monitoring and alerting systems are not only reactive to incidents but also data and ensuring they integrate seamlessly into the existing IT ecosystem. advancements, or changes in business requirements without major redesign. stakeholders. contribute to the overall stability, security, and efficiency of the IT environment. Capturing and managing events The MA process results in the identification and capture of an event. Events can be user-generated such as keystrokes and mouse clicks or system-generated such an application or container launching, The management of events means having defined a predetermined set of event types and establishing running out of memory, and/or generating errors. the expected follow-on activity or action required. Types of events: Security and risk events: Events that are related to security breaches or attempts to breach Logs and audits: Monitoring system logs, user activities, and compliance audits to detect Application events: Events are related to software application performance metrics, errors, crashes, and response times. Alerts are triggered when specific conditions affect the user security anomalies or policy violations experience.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 283 Performance events: Events that are related to performance issues such as slow response times Availability events: These are events that are related to the system availability such as downtime Resource utilization: Events related to resource allocation and usage to optimize efficiency and Configuration change events: These are events that are related to changes in system configuration Identity and access management: Events monitoring user authentication, access privileges, and Environmental events: Monitoring environmental factors like temperature, humidity, and power Operational events: These events represent status updates regarding an action that has started, is ongoing, or has been completed. Examples comprise the completion of a batch process, the start or system crashes or system failures. prevent resource exhaustion such as software updates or hardware upgrades. account activities to detect suspicious behavior. fluctuations in data centers to prevent equipment damage of a backup, or the login to a device such as a server. Each of these example event types can be considered either: Informational: This is an event that needs to be logged and stored to support observability, traceability, Warning: This is an event that crosses some predefined threshold or level that signifies the need to take Anomaly: This is an event that breaches a target or an expected and possibly agreed-upon level of Based on predefined actions, various processes such as incident management, security management, and change management (as examples) would be engaged to support the appropriate automated or manual and nonrepudiation proactive action to avoid a service impact performance that requires urgent prioritization, triage, and remediation response to each event. Service monitoring and alerting MA for IT service management focuses on monitoring the customer; S experience with IT products and services. This means monitoring is not only performing at a device or component level but also at the level at which IT systems and products are used by their business or customer functions to deliver service For example, assume a customer has a customer relationship management (CRM) system deployed. While the servers may be reporting a healthy status, if the application has been misconfigured or a batch process is hung, the end user would be undergoing a degraded service experience. Meanwhile a traditional domain-based monitoring solution is likely to be reporting the device or application as outcomes. functioning and green meaning there are no issues.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 284 Taking an IT service management approach, the CRM product would be modeled in a configuration management database and correspondingly monitored to show the service dependencies (e.g., It depends on the web, application, and database tiers in addition to requiring the network, servers, and storage to be functioning). This model is then enhanced by simulated end-user transactions and application performance metrics to identify issues beyond the simple availability of the core IT Business process monitoring is the practice of monitoring business processes and their corresponding transactions (e.g, payroll management) to ensure they are running efficiently and effectively. This involves monitoring key performance indicators (KPIS) to identify areas where improvements can be made. Business process monitoring can help organizations identify bottlenecks in their processes and improve overall efficiency. It can also help organizations identify potential issues before they become Ultimately, service-based monitoring, event management, and alerting enables the service provider infrastructure. devices. major problems. organization to support business value realization. Activity Planning and designing Establish monitoring, event, and alerting requirements. Description The process activity defines the criteria for monitoring a device, application, system, product, and/or service. The output of this activity is to identify event types, alerts, and required actions as input into service product and The goal is to ensure all critical components are being monitored effectively and that appropriate actions are taken in response to any issues that arise. To establish these requirements, it is important to consider the specific goals and objectives of the business or customer of the system, product, or service being monitored. This may involve identifying KPIS through customer engagement and stakeholder involvement or other metrics that are important Additional nonfunctional requirements based on architectural standards, security, and risk requirements as well as compliance considerations should Based on both functional and nonfunctional monitoring requirements, input is gathered as to which key stakeholders should be involved in specific events as well as communication requirements related to the alert such as. service design as well as service assurance and testing. to track such as response time, uptime, or error rates. be taken into account. Content Format Frequency Access

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 285 Activity Planning and designing Define monitoring characteristics, event rules. Description This activity establishes the specific parameters that will be used to monitor a system, product, or service, including the metrics that will be tracked and the Once these elements have been identified, the next step is to define the tracking and monitoring. This input is used to establish reactive, proactive, and predictive monitoring activities that are used to measure and extrapolate In addition to defining the metrics and characteristics to be monitored, it is also important to establish rules for triggering alerts and follow-up events based on specific thresholds or other criteria. This may involve setting up rules for certain metrics or combinations of metrics, as well as establishing notification channels, solutions, and platforms for alerts to be sent on. Once the monitoring, event, and alert requirements have been identified and defined, the next step is to determine the appropriate monitoring tools or external services to use and to configure them to track the necessary data points. This may involve setting up monitoring scripts, configuring software Sending alerts and notifications refers to the activity of notifying relevant personnel or automated activities for self-healing when specific events or metrics reach critical levels. This involves configuring alerts, dashboards, and automation tools to provide timely and accurate information about the state This may involve setting up thresholds for specific metrics such as a certain level of traffic or a certain number of errors and configuring alerts to be sent Event automation tools can be used to automate common tasks and workflows in response to specific events or alerts. This may involve setting up scripts or other tools to automatically open an incident ticket, raise a change record, or perform and document standard changes such as scaling cloud-based resources or taking other actions to maintain the system rules that will be used to trigger alerts and events. metrics, alerts, and specific data sources, systems attributes, and system logs that will be used for KPIS and metrics. Planning and designing Configure alert notifications, dashboards, ITSM process actions. agents, or using third-party monitoring services. of the system, product, or service. via email, SMS texts, chat tools, or other channels. performance.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 286 Activity Capturing and Perform continuous monitoring. Description Performing continuous monitoring refers to the ongoing process of computer systems, products, and services. The goal of this activity is to identify potential issues and vulnerabilities in real time to allow the service provider to take proactive measures to prevent or mitigate any negative Continuous monitoring involves collecting and analyzing data from various sources such as logs, sensors, and agents and comparing it against predefined baselines or thresholds identified in the previous process activities. This data is then used to generate alerts or notifications to inform subject matter experts or security personnel of any deviations from expected managing events monitoring, analyzing, and reporting on the performance and security of impacts. behavior or performance. Service monitoring Monitoring services and business processes in an organization relies heavily and alerting Conduct service and business process monitoring. on understanding how digital and IT resources collaborate to maintain smooth operations. Rather than zeroing in on specific devices or domains, service monitoring examines the overall performance of systems or For effective monitoring, accurate information and solutions that are aware of relationships and dependencies are crucial. These tools keep track of service availability, performance, and data processing. Their focus extends beyond individual parts to the interconnected workings of the entire system. In essence, service monitoring goes beyond watching singular components. By utilizing precise configuration details and strong monitoring tools at a systemic level, organizations gain the ability to navigate their digital service environments proactively. This proactive approach fosters efficiency, reliability, and, ultimately, success in business operations. An effective MA process requires a well-defined strategy that includes policies and procedures, the appropriate tools and technologies, and regular Service provider organizations should also regularly review and update their monitoring and alerting plan, processes, alerts, and key metrics to ensure they remain effective and relevant to their changing IT environment and technology holistic products. Planning and designing Review monitoring, alerting, and reporting for improvement. monitoring and reporting. business needs.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 287 Monitoring and Alerting: Actors and Roles The following list represents key stakeholders, actors, and roles related to the monitoring and alerting process. IT operations teams: Are responsible for their area of technology specialization System administrators: Configure and maintain the monitoring tools, set alert thresholds, and Network administrators: Monitor and manage the network performance to address connectivity Database administrators: Oversee the database monitoring to ensure data integrity and Service desk/help desk: Responsible for both the initial response and communication of user focused ensure the system's health issues performance optimization events: Service desk analysts: Receive alerts, perform the initial troubleshooting, and escalate issues Incident managers: Coordinate critical alert responses to minimize the service's impact when necessary DevOps and development teams: DevOps engineers: Integrate: monitoring into development, as well as automate deployments and Developers: Implement code-level monitoring and optimize the applications for performance Security analysts: Monitor for security alerts to ensure compliance with the security policies and Compliance officers: Align the monitoring practices with the regulatory requirements and ensure the application's health Security and compliance: regulations industry standards Business/customer stakeholders: Business owners/managers: Provide insights on the monitoring requirements aligned with the business processes Service level or service delivery managers: Collaborate on defining the monitoring metrics in line with the service level agreements Data analysts and performance reporting teams: Data analysts: Analyze monitoring data, generate reports, and provide insights for process These stakeholders each play pivotal roles in ensuring the efficiency, alignment, and success of the improvements monitoring and alerting process within IT service management.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting with their generic responsibilities. 288 All the processes encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process: The monitoring and alerting manager The MA manager is accountable to the MA process owner and performs the day-to-day operational and managerial tasks demanded by the process activities. In general, the MA manager oversees the following activities: Drives the efficiency and effectiveness of the MA process Ensures compliance with MA standards and policies Integrates MA with other ITSM processes Provides input into important decisions regarding MA supporting monitoring technology requirements Addresses new monitoring, event, and alerting service requests Actively pursues new MA process opportunities: New service level agreements or those up for review and revision New applications/services or those being revised and updated Capital projects Assists the application and infrastructure of device, product, and service owners in the identification of alerts and the appropriate threshold to monitor based on the stated event Analyzes event records to detect any positive trends and proposing actions to rectify apparent requirements Periodically reviewing significant events and anomaly alerts weak areas in the MA process Produces regular and accurate management reports that deliver business value Monitors the effectiveness of MA and making recommendations for improvement Monitoring and alerting analysts MA analysts are the line staff who are the subject matter experts for assessing, planning, and monitoring MA process activities and tools for their functional organization and specific technology platform. They function as contact people between the different departments for a specific process and may be responsible for the design of MA processes and automation within their own departments. In general, the MA analysts activities are to: Execute the process activities for MA for their specific IT service, technology platform, or Design, implement, and maintain the monitoring solutions according to the business Configure the monitoring solutions and set thresholds based on the requirements Validate the requirements of the events against the capability of the monitoring systems Make technical recommendations in the situation where the monitoring systems cannot support the requirements of the event, which can include upgrades to the monitoring system, additional Instrument the monitoring systems as required for the workflows required by the events organizational entity requirements and best practices hardware and software, or alternative requirements

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 289 Enter all relevant details into the event record and ensure this data is accurate Execute and coordinate reactive, proactive, predictive, and synthetic monitoring Support the event definition, instrumentation, and correlation Monitor the event resolution's progress in accordance with defined actions Engage with peer analysts to keep an up-to-date view on their activities Attend improvement meetings with the MA manager and other MA analysts Perform trend analyses Review and evaluate closed events Stay up to date with monitoring vendor solution road maps and lead efforts to implement new features, enhancements, and upgrades Monitoring and Alerting: Key Performance Indicators (KPIS) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: The degree or coverage to which devices, systems, products, and services are monitored KPIS: The percentage increase of devices, applications, systems, products, and services The percentage increase in the number of new or modified systems, products, and services that have monitoring, event, and alert requirements defined as part of service The percentage increase of products'and services'availability reporting currently under reactive and proactive monitoring design and service assurance and testing CSF: Event data is available for historical analysis and predictive extrapolation. Event data is stored to support historical analyses, satisfy regulatory requirements, and improve security, traceability, and nonrepudiation objectives. KPIS: The total number of new event records entered into the event logs by product and Event volume the number of events generated by a system or service over a period of service time toidentify patterns and trends in the system behavior

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 290 CSF: The reduction of time between the event discovery and alerting to incident management and change management for service remediation, restoration, and change management KPIs: The percentage reduction in the time to respond to events or via monitoring and event tracking systems The increase in the number of medium to high-impact incidents handled or opened by The reduction in the false positive rate  the percentage of alerts or notifications generated by monitoring tools that are not actually indicative of an issue or event The percentage increase in products and services that are measured based on the mean The percentage reduction of the average number of open events time between failures (MTBF) CSF: The minimization of the time delay between the event occurrence, detection, and alerting to key stakeholders KPIs: The mean time to detect (MTTD): This metric measures the time it takes to detect an The percentage reduction in the proportion of medium to high-impact incidents that The increase in the number of alerts acknowledged and cleared in the last month issue or event in a system or service. are initially human-reported Monitoring and Alerting: Integrations The monitoring and alerting process is integrated with many different IT service management processes that include service design activities, service assurance and testing, service level management, and service support. The following are a few key examples of critical integrations. Incident management The integration between monitoring and incident response and management is crucial to ensure a prompt and effective response to incidents. Key integrations: Alerting: Monitoring tools generate alerts when certain thresholds or anomalies are detected such as system failures or security breaches. These alerts are used by incident management teams to Incident prioritization: Incident management uses monitoring data to help prioritize incidents Escalation: Monitoring tools can be configured to escalate alerts to higher-level support teams or management if the incident is not resolved within a specified time frame. This escalation can help initiate the incident response process promptly. based on their impact and urgency. ensure incidents are addressed promptly and effectively.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting Service level management 291 Service level objectives and targets are a key input into the MA process. This process supports the first activity of identifying monitoring and alerting requirements, because it establishes the service expectations against which event monitoring can be measured. This helps ensure acceptable service performance and compliance to the service level agreements: MA is a key input into service level management because new SLAs are being negotiated, and existing service level agreements are under review and revision. In this capacity, MA can provide input to the monitoring capabilities the IT service provider will undertake regarding the service MA also identifies the alerts and necessary thresholds based on the service component records level commitments related to the monitoring and support response. being used to define the necessary managed events. Service assurance and testing Monitoring and alerting involves the continuous collection and analysis of data to identify potential issues, while testinginvolves the process of validating that the IT environment is performing as expected. Following are some key integrations between monitoring and alerting and testing: Monitoring and alerting provides key input into the test plan, scenario, and test case planning. Monitoring and alerting tools can be used to monitor test environments to provide real-time insights into the performance of test systems and applications. This information can be used by testing teams to optimize test scripts and identify the potential issues that could impact testing Automated testing tools can be integrated with monitoring and alerting tools to trigger tests automatically when alerts are generated. This integration ensures tests are performed promptly Monitoring and alerting tools can be used to collect data on the system performance such as the response time and throughput. This data can be used by performance testing teams to identify Test results can be analyzed using monitoring and alerting tools to identify patterns and trends in the system behavior. This analysis can help identify potential issues that may impact the outcomes. and accurately to minimize the risk of downtime or disruptions. potential bottlenecks or areas for optimization. performance or security of the IT environment.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 292 Monitoring and Alerting: Enablers By focusing on these enablers and success factors across tools and technology, resources, and processes, organizations can develop a robust monitoring and alerting framework that enhances operational efficiency, minimizes risks, and ensures proactive management of IT environments. The following are examples of key enablers for an effective monitoring and alerting process. Tools and technology: Monitoring and alerting is a highly automated process that requires a solid technology competency and expertise within a service provider organization. The MA process should have supporting technology and solutions that enable data collection, real-time monitoring, and customizable dashboards, as well as reporting, alerting and notification, scalability, and integration with other IT service management solutions. MA technology requirements: Data collection: The solution should be capable of collecting data from various sources such as Product and service monitoring: The solution should be able to aggregate data that is both derived from the configuration management database and, through discovery, to monitor Real-time monitoring: The solution should be able to monitor the IT environments in real time, providing instant alerts when thresholds are exceeded, or anomalies are detected. Dashboards and reporting: The solution should be able to generate customizable dashboards and reports to visualize data and trends that help teams identify potential issues quickly. Service level reporting: The solution should be able to support the requirements of service level management reporting that is focused on the key metrics and KPIs covered by SLAs. Alerting and notification: The solution should be able to send alerts and notifications via various channels such as email, SMS, or chat to ensure teams can respond promptly to incidents. Scalability: The solution should be scalable and able to handle a growing volume of data and Integration: The solution should be able to integrate with other IT management tools such as incident management, workflow automation and orchestration, and provisioning tools. Security: The solution should have robust security features such as user access controls, data Configuration: The tool should be easy to configure or tailor to allow teams to define custom Analytics and machine learning: The tool should have analytics and machine-learning capabilities that allow teams to identify patterns and trends in the system behavior, as well as servers, applications, networks, and cloud environments. systems, products, and services. monitoring requirements as the organization expands. encryption, and data privacy to ensure sensitive data is protected. monitoring metrics and alert thresholds based on their specific requirements. predict potential issues and automate remediation.

Chapter 13: Monitoring and Alerting 293 Resources: Skilled personnel: Investing in skilled personnel with expertise in operating and configuring monitoring tools Providing continuous training and upskilling to keep up with evolving technologies and effectively methodologies Adequate infrastructure: Ensuring a robust IT: infrastructure capable of supporting monitoring tools and handling the data Allocating sufficient resources such as the servers, storage, and network bandwidth to influx without compromising performance accommodate monitoring needs Budget and investment: Allocating a suitable budget for acquiring, implementing, and maintaining monitoring tools and Prioritizing investment in the technology upgrades and enhancements for improved monitoring associated resources capabilities Processes: Defined monitoring strategy: Developing a comprehensive monitoring strategy aligned with the organizational goals and Defining clear objectives, KPIS, and thresholds for monitoring and alerting processes service level agreements Effective configuration management: Establishing accurate configuration management processes to maintain up-to-date information Integrating with change management processes to ensure updates and modifications don't about IT assets and their relationships disrupt monitoring accuracy Incident response and escalation procedures: Creating efficient incident response protocols with well-defined escalation paths for the timely Regularly testing and refining the response procedures to minimize downtime and service resolution of issues disruptions

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Vendor Management: Purpose and Objectives Vendor management (VM) is a strategic ITSM process that is focused on the sourcing and management of vendor relationships and contracts SO that business value is optimized, and risk is appropriately managed. This process requires a focus and dedicated resources from both the service provider and its related vendors and will vary in effort level and formality based on the vendor relationship type. Purpose: Vendor management efficiently and effectively sources, oversees, and integrates third-party relationships and resources to consistently realize and optimize the expected value from vendor services. The VM process ensures value is planned, managed, and realized through all aspects of a sourcing life cycle from strategic planning, contracting, onboarding, operational performance, and responsiveness to change requests and demand fluctuations. It ensures vendor relationships are mutually beneficial and equitable for both parties as well as facilitating continuous. improvement and improved skills, There are a variety of reasons that organizations consider and select vendors and external suppliers to support their business goals and objectives. These reasons and drivers provide a key input into the VM strategy and planning to ensure that VM activities are in alignment with the strategic goals and the internal service provider capabilities. For example: Outsourcing a service to a vendor may be considered knowledge, and capabilities for the organization's internal staff and resources. for several different business reasons including: Innovation: The organization seeks new ways of achieving its business objectives, perhaps by Economics: The organization is seeking more cost-effective ways of delivering services in comparison with what it is doing now and/or what others are paying for similar services at the A skills and knowledge shortage: The organization lacks the required skills and knowledge Flexibility and agility: The organization requires the ability to vary its requirements, workforce, Competitive forces: The organization is seeking an improved quality of service in comparison with what it is doing now and/or what competitors are achieving with similar services providing new services or digital channels same level of quality internally and must either buy them or outsource the service and/or service providers over time

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 295 Development and implementation timelines: The organization requires vendor support to meet Business synergy: The organization seeks service providers whose products and services will at time-sensitive deadline complement its own activities Risk transfer: The organization seeks to transfer risks to a third-party Access to technologies and solutions: The organization wants access to new or emerging solutions or technologies without having to invest internally in keeping them up to date Cost predictability: The organization's S priority is to be able to make accurate forecasts for current and future spending in support of the business The vendor management scope: The primary objective in defining a scoping policy for vendor management is to establish a consistent approach to managing different vendor types across the organization based on predefined criteria. Not all vendors or external supplier relationships will fall under strategic VM governance and management; for example, some transactional vendors may be managed by functional management and sourced primarily through procurement. The VM process and roles will be primarily focused on vendor relationships that: Play a vital role in the organization's daily operations Have a critical impact on the success of strategic projects Require long-term contracts Are difficult to change quickly Have regulatory impacts and implications Access or manage critical or sensitive data or IT assets Have the potential for significant and long-term financial risk and obligations Require frequent interaction and collaboration relating to disputes and conflicts Objectives Effective VM requires a comprehensive approach that covers all aspects of the vendor relationship and sourcing life cycle from vendor selection and contracting to performance monitoring and improvement. The process involves regular communication with vendors to monitor their performance against agreed The main objectives of strategic VM are to improve service value, reduce costs, increase efficiency, and manage risks associated with the vendor relationship. To achieve these goals, organizations need to have a clear understanding of their business needs and objectives, as well as the capabilities and limitations of upon metrics and address any issues that arise. their vendors.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Some key objectives: 296 Establishing vendor management governance, strategy, and plans Working with procurement to support the identification and selection of vendors Establish and maintain mutually beneficial relationships including: a Strategic alignment: A good alignment of culture, values, and objectives to lead to an Integration: A close integration of the processes of the two organizations a Information flow: Good communication and information exchanges at all levels, especially at the strategic level, to lead to a close understanding Mutual trust: A relationship built on the mutual trust between the organizations and their Ensure compliance with contractual obligations, as well as legal and regulatory requirements Optimize costs by negotiating better pricing or identifying opportunities for cost savings Mitigate risks by identifying and mitigating risks associated with the vendor relationship such as Monitor and improve performance: against key performance indicators and take corrective action when necessary to ensure the vendor is meeting the organization's needs and expectations Continuously evaluate the vendor's performance and consider new vendors to ensure the alignment of business strategies respective individuals such as data privacy and security regulations supply chain disruptions, quality issues, or data breaches organization is working with the most effective and efficient vendors The ability to manage external service relationships proactively Benefits to IT service providers: Vendor contracts that appropriately support IT service provider agreements and SLAs Both improved transparency and relationships between the IT service provider and vendors The integration of vendor resources and processes with internal ITSM processes and tools Improved collaboration, conflict resolution, and dispute management Increased efficiency and effectiveness in the negotiation of vendor contracts Optimization of the value and costs of vendor-provided services A reduction in the impact and cost of contract changes Willing vendor involvement with continuous improvement An improved alignment of IT services with business objectives Faster vendor resolutions to incidents and problems The delivery of IT services in alignment with business requirements Transparency in the classification and levels of risk for and with each vendor Better investment decisions for the renewal and/or termination of vendors Benefits to customers: The seamless delivery of IT services that require the direct or indirect support/provisioning by vendors

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Vendor Management: Policies 297 "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's by a group of people or a business organization"a goals. Policy statement One approach One The reason for the policy To ensure consistent and quality management of the vendors throughout the term of the relationship Benefits Consistency in managing vendors and contracts for the seamless services Consistency in policies and procedures related to vendor and contract management Improved communication and relationships Improved value for money spent on vendors'products and services Improved VM information performance management The cost-effective management of VM resources for the management of vendor relationships and contracts VM approach based on IT service management principles and practices will be utilized throughout the organization of delivery Defined scope The vendor management scope, purview, governance, and relationship management activities will be based on vendor classification considerations. To manage vendors and vendor relationships effectively and efficiently 20 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Policy statement Aligning vendor contracts The terms and conditions and service targets of all vendor contracts will underpin the service level targets as agreed upon with the business for the services provisioned or supported by the vendor. Vendor and procurement integration Communication with potential vendors before and during the solicitation, bidding, and procurement of new contracts will be managed by and through the VM process in coordination with procurement. Authorized roles Only persons specifically identified by the VM process and assigned specific roles and responsibilities for the process and/or specific contracts will interact on contract expectations, disputes, and conflicts. No gift policy No gifts, rewards, or promotional items will be accepted from vendors. 298 The reason for the policy To ensure all contracts and money spent by aligning their outputs with business and customer requirements Benefits The seamless delivery and support of all IT services provided to the business that are directly or indirectly provisioned by vendors with business/customer goals vendors provide value for the Ensures consistent communication with, and the proper expectations of, potential vendors The effective, efficient, and accurate management of potential vendors the solicitation, and procurement of new contracts Reduces or eliminates issues caused by miscommunication, misunderstanding, and incorrect expectations The effective and efficient management of vendor relationship and contract management Reduces or eliminates delivery and supports service issues caused by poor or disorganized interactions with vendors Improves objectivity in vendor selection and management Ensures fairness and transparency in the consideration and selection of potential vendors during bidding, Ensures consistent communications and interactions between the vendors and the IT service provider's organization around contract terms and deliverables Ensures fairness in dealing with potential and existing vendors

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Policy statement Vendor contracts and integrated ITSM processes Vendor integration and performance expectations with internal ITSM processes and regulatory requirements will be defined within vendor contracts. 299 The reason for the policy Ensures all vendors are aware of, adhere to, and meet the requirements of the organization Benefits The seamless provisioning of IT services for services directly or indirectly provisioned by vendors Protects the confidentiality, availability, and integrity of the organization's information IT assets, employees, and customers Vendor Management: Terms and Definitions Contract: This is a legally binding agreement between an organization and a vendor that outlines the terms and conditions of the goods or services to be provided, as well as the rights and obligations of both Internal service provider: This is an IT service provider that is part of the same organization as its Partnership: This describes a relationship between two organizations that involves working closely together for common goals and/or mutual benefits. The IT service provider should have a partnership Performance metrics: This is a set of quantitative and qualitative measures used to evaluate the performance of a vendor that includes delivery times, quality, responsiveness, and customer service. Outsourcing: This is the process of delegating or contracting business functions or processes to an external third-party service provider rather than performing those functions internally. Outsourcing can involve a range of activities that include IT services, human resources, accounting, manufacturing, customer service, or other business functions. The outsourcing arrangement typically involves a contractual agreement between the organization and the service provider, which specifies the scope of Supplier: An alternative name for a vendor or third-party provider. This is a party responsible for supplying goods or services that are required to deliver IT services. A supplier may be an internal parties. customer. An IT service provider may have both internal and external customers. with the business and with third parties that are critical to the delivery of IT services. services, performance standards, pricing, and other terms and conditions. supplier or an external third-party supplier. Sourcing relationships: Sourcing relationship types refers to the different types of relationships that an organization can have with its vendors. These relationships can vary in terms of their level of collaboration, communication, and strategic alignment.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 300 A critical output of VM is the vendor type classification. The type or class of vendor identifies to what level VM will be involved and impacts the formality of contract negotiations and performance management planning. Key considerations include the level of integration into the organization's workforce of the vendor's S resources and staff, resource and technology governance requirements, and Each type of relationship may require different activities, levels of governance, contracting requirements, the involvement of VM with ITSM processes and tools. and performance management requirements. Vendor classification types: Tanuactionalkcommodity vendor: These are short-term relationships in which the organization engages with a vendor to purchase goods or services on an as-needed basis. These relationships tend to be focused on price and convenience rather than a long-term strategic alignment. Lespurcingcollaborative vendors: These are relationships in which the client and vendor share responsibility for a project or operation's success by mutually providing resources. These are longer-term relationships in which the organization and vendor work together to achieve mutual goals and objectives. These relationships tend to involve more open communication, joint Strategic partner: These are relationships in which an external vendor takes on responsibilities for an integrated set of business-critical services, processes, and technologies. These are the most advanced type of sourcing relationships in which the organization and vendor form a close, long term partnership to achieve shared objectives. Strategic partnerships involve high levels of collaboration, joint decision-making, and resource-sharing and are typically focused on driving innovation, improving competitiveness, and creating sustainable value over time. Multi-sourcing: Multi-sourcing refers to a strategic approach where a single client engages and coordinates with multiple service providers to fulfill various needs or aspects of their operations. This model involves the client taking on the responsibility of overseeing, managing, and integrating the diverse services offered by these multiple providers. The client maintains control over the relationships to ensure each provider aligns with the overarching objectives and standards of the client's operations. The primary goal is to optimize performance, minimize risk, and leverage the specialized expertise of different providers to achieve comprehensive solutions Alliance: An alliance in the context of service providers involves a collaborative arrangement between multiple entities, typically service providers, pooling their resources, expertise, and capabilities to jointly serve one or more clients. Within this cooperative framework, each service provider brings distinct strengths or specialized skills to the table to contribute to a combined service offering for the client. Often, in an alliance, there exists a lead or primary service provider that acts as the main interface with the client to represent the collective capabilities of the alliance while ensuring the seamless coordination and delivery of services aligned with the client's needs and expectations. Alliances aim to leverage complementary strengths, enhance the service quality, and provide comprehensive solutions to clients through a unified approach. planning, and risk-sharing and are focused on creating value for both parties. for the client's requirements.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 301 Joint venture: A joint venture among service providers involves the formation of a collaborative partnership or agreement, where multiple entities come together to pursue shared business opportunities or projects, particularly in serving one or more clients. Unlike a formal business entity, a joint venture is a looser and often temporary collaboration established to address specific client needs or projects. Each participating service provider contributes its resources, expertise, or capabilities to the joint effort that aims to combine strengths and deliver the services or solutions collectively. Joint ventures are formed with a defined scope and purpose to focus on mutual benefit while maintaining individual identities and autonomy. These ventures facilitate the pooling of diverse talents and resources to address specific client requirements or undertake projects that may require combined expertise and resources beyond what individual providers Request for information (RFI): This is a document or communication used to solicit information from potential vendors about their products, services, capabilities, or other aspects related to a project or initiative. RFIs are typically used as a preliminary step in the procurement process to gather information about potential vendors and their offerings before issuing a formal request for proposal (RFP) or request Request for proposal (RFP): This is a formal document used by organizations to solicit proposals from vendors for the provision of goods or services. An RFP typically outlines the organization's: requirements, specifications, and evaluation. criteria, as well as the timelines, submission guidelines, and other terms Service integration and management (SIAM): Within the context of vendor management, this refers to the structured approach of overseeing and coordinating multiple service providers to ensure the seamless integration, efficient delivery, and optimal performance of services across various vendors. In essence, in a SIAM model one organization (internal, external, or hybrid) acts as the orchestrator or integrator of diverse vendor services to meet the overarching needs and objectives of the client Within vendor management, SIAM focuses on creating a unified and cohesive environment by managing relationships, defining clear roles and responsibilities, establishing standardized processes, and ensuring effective communication among different vendors. It aims to harmonize the delivery of services, maintain a consistency in quality, and streamline the overall service experience for the client organization. SIAM in vendor management involves implementing frameworks, tools, and governance structures that facilitate collaboration and coordination among multiple vendors while aligning their efforts with the client's objectives. This approach allows forl better control, visibility, and accountability across the vendor landscape, ultimately enhancing the overall efficiency, effectiveness, and value derived from the Sourcing life cycle: The sourcing life cycle refers to the sequential stages or phases involved in the process of sourcing goods, services, or solutions from external vendors. This life cycle typically encompasses various activities: from identifying needs and selecting vendors to contract negotiations, performance evaluation, and, ultimately, the conclusion or renewal of vendor relationships. can offer. for quotation (RFQ). and conditions for vendors to follow when preparing their proposals. organization. combined services of various vendors.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 302 Value for money: This is an informal measure of cost-effectiveness, Value for money is often based on a Vendor: This is an external vendor or third-party supplier or provider of goods or services to an Vendor management (VM): This is the process of selecting, managing, and optimizing relationships with vendors to ensure that they provide the necessary goods and services on time, within budget, and to the comparison with the cost of alternatives. organization. required quality standards. Vendor management versus procurement Vendor management and procurement, which is a subprocess of financial management, are both important functions within a service organization. However, they have different goals and Procurement is a subprocess activity of financial management, and it refers to the process of acquiring goods and services from external sources, that includes identifying needs, selecting vendors, negotiating contracts, and placing orders. It focuses on finding thel best value for money or, to put it bluntly, getting the most benefit for the least cost and ensuring goods and services Vendor management is a strategic process that concentrates on vendor strategy and planning, vendor classification, vendor integration within ITSM processes, and continuous improvement, as well as ongoing relationship management with the vendors once they have been selected and contracted. Vendor management focuses on ensuring that the vendor is meeting the organization's needs and expectations in addition to monitoring the vendor's performance and While procurement is a one-time process that ends once the goods or services are acquired, vendor management is an ongoing process that focuses on building and maintaining a positive, activities. are delivered on time and up to the required quality standards. identifying opportunities for improvement. mutually beneficial, and productive relationship with the vendor. Procurement activities: 1. Identifying needs: While working with vendor management and customer requirement inputs, procurement identifies the resources, goods, products, or services required to meet 2. Vendor selection: This involves evaluating potential vendors based on factors such as cost, 3. Contract negotiation: This involves negotiating the terms and conditions of the vendor agreement to ensure that both parties are clear on their responsibilities and obligations. 4. Order placement: This involves placing orders with the selected vendors and ensuring that goods or services are delivered on time and up to the required quality standards. the organization's business objectives. quality, delivery times, and reputation.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 303 Vendor management activities: 1. Vendor strategy planning and classification: Developing an approach to vendor management that aligns with business objectives and strategy and that approaches vendor 2. Performance monitoring: This involves tracking the vendor's performance against key performance indicators (KPIS) and taking corrective action when necessary 3. Relationship management: This involves building and maintaining a positive relationship with the vendor that includes regular communication and collaboration to identify areas for 4. Risk management: This involves identifying and mitigating risks associated with the vendor In summary, procurement focuses on the acquisition of goods and services; vendor management focuses on overseeing the relationship with the vendors to ensure that they are managed appropriately to meet the organization's needs and expectations over time. While both processes have different focus areas, it is critical that they work in tight collaboration, especially when new Vendor selection: This is the process activity of identifying and evaluating potential vendors based on Vendor evaluation: This is the process activity of assessing the performance and capabilities of a vendor Vendor relationship management: This is the ongoing process of building and maintaining a positive and productive relationship with vendors that includes regular communication and collaboration to Vendor risk management: This is the process of identifying, assessing, and mitigating risks associated with the vendor relationship such as supply chain disruptions, quality issues, or data breaches. Vendor consolidation: This is the process activity of reducing the number of vendors used by an organization to streamline procurement and vendor management processes, reduce costs, and improve relationships differently, based on vendor classification improvement and optimize performance. relationship such as supply chain disruptions or quality issues. services or vendors are being engaged. factors such as cost, quality, delivery times, and reputation. against established criteria that include quality, delivery, cost, and customer service. identify areas for improvement and optimize performance. vendor relationships.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 304 Vendor Management: Triggering Events and Inputs In an IT management context, several triggering events can initiate the vendor management process or contract life cycle. These events often signal the need for assessment, renegotiation or initiation of new vendor relationships. Triggering events: Contract expiration or approaching a renewal date Performance issues or service level agreement (SLA) breaches Change in business needs or objectives Mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures Budgetary constraints or cost optimization initiatives Compliance or regulatory changes Technology upgrades or innovations Vendor performance reviews or feedback Incidents or disruptions Business continuity planning Contract expiration or approaching a renewal date: When an existing contract with a vendor is nearing its expiration date, it prompts a review of services rendered, performance metrics, and discussions about Performance issues or service level agreement (SLA) breaches: Instances, where the vendor fails to meet the agreed-upon service levels or quality standards outlined in the SLAs, can trigger a review of the Change in business needs or objectives: Shifts in business strategies, technological advancements, or organizational restructuring may necessitate the evaluation of existing vendor services or the search for Mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures: Changes in the company's structure due to mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures may impact vendor relationships, leading to the need for consolidating, modifying, or Budgetary constraints or cost optimization initiatives: Financial considerations, such as cost reductions, budget constraints, or the need for more cost-effective solutions, can trigger a reassessment of existing Compliance or regulatory changes: Changes in industry regulations, compliance requirements, or data security standards may necessitate a review of vendor contracts to ensure alignment with updated legal Technology upgrades, refreshes, or innovations: Advancements in technology or the introduction of new solutions might prompt the evaluation. of the existing vendors to ensure they can adapt or provide aj potential renewal or renegotiation. contract terms, possible penalties, or termination. discussions. new vendors to better align with the evolving business requirements. terminating contracts. vendor contracts or the exploration of: new vendors offering competitive pricing. and regulatory obligations. innovative services that align with the company's technological road map.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 305 Vendor performance reviews or feedback: Regular performance assessments or feedback from internal stakeholders highlighting issues, concerns, or positive aspects of vendor services can trigger discussions Incidents or service disruptions: Significant incidents, service disruptions, or security breaches caused by a vendor may lead to urgent reviews, liability discussions, and potential changes to the existing Business continuity planning: Reviewing and updating vendor contracts to ensure they align with the company's business continuity plans and disaster recovery strategies, especially in scenarios where The following list provides examples of key inputs into the vendor management process. about contract modifications, improvements, or termination. contract terms. vendors play a critical role in these areas. Inputs: Business requirements Legal and regulatory requirements Security and risk management requirements Service level management agreements and targets Service support requirements from incident and problem Service request requirements Change and release requirements Service assurance and testing requirements IT asset and financial requirements Configuration management requirements Business requirements: These provide direction and lay the foundation for vendor selection, guiding the identification of vendors capable of meeting specific business needs. They also shape the contract terms and KPIS to ensure alignment with the organization's strategic goals and operational needs. Legal and regulatory requirements: Compliance with legal and regulatory standards influences the drafting and structuring of contracts. It ensures that vendors adhere to necessary laws and regulations, Security and risk management requirements: These requirements dictate the inclusion of security clauses and protocols in contracts, ensuring vendors comply with the organization's security standards Service level management agreements and targets: These define the expected levels of service and performance. They form the basis for SLAs within contracts, specifying what the vendor is obligated to Service support requirements from incident and problem management: These define how vendors should handle incidents and problems, outlining their responsibilities in addressing and resolving issues Service request requirements: These outline the process for requesting additional services or modifications, setting clear guidelines within the contract for how such requests are managed and reducing legal risks for the organization. and minimizing potential risks associated with data breaches or security lapses. deliver and providing metrics for the ongoing performance evaluation. promptly and effectively. fulfilled by the vendor.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 306 Change and release requirements: These specify how changes and releases to services are managed, ensuring that the vendor follows standardized procedures when implementing changes or service Service assurance and testing requirements: These define testing and quality assurance procedures, ensuring that the vendor delivers services that meet the predefined quality standards and undergo IT asset and financial requirements: These include aspects such as cost structures, invoicing, and asset management, outlining financial terms, payment schedules, and responsibilities regarding IT assets Configuration management requirements: These dictate how the vendor should handle configurations, changes, and documentation, ensuring proper tracking and management of IT configurations as per the Each of these inputs plays a crucial role in shaping the contract terms, obligations, and expectations between the organization and its vendors, contributing significantly to effective vendor management and ensuring that the delivered services align with the organization's needs and standards. updates. necessary testing protocols. within the contract. organization's standards and policies. Triggering events Inputs Contract expiration or approaching: ja renewal date Performancei issues or SLAI breaches Changei in business needs or objectives Mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures Budgetary constraints or cost optimizationi initiatives Compliance or regulatory changes Technology upgrades ori innovations Vendor performance reviews or feedback Incidents or disruptions Business continuity planning Business requirements Legal and regulatory requirements Security and risk management requirements Service level management agreements and targets Service support requirements from incident and problem Service request requirements Change and release requirements Service assurance and testing requirements ITa asset and financial requirements Configuration management requirements Figure 30: Vendor management: triggering events and inputs Vendor Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: Contract expiration or termination Performance evaluation and benchmarking Completion of deliverables Vendor consolidation or replacement Organizational changes

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 307 Contract expiration or termination: The contract reaches its predetermined end date, prompting a Performance evaluation and benchmarking: A comprehensive assessment of vendor performance against predefined benchmarks or KPIs is conducted to gauge the vendor's effectiveness. Completion of deliverables: Fulfillment of all deliverables and milestones outlined in the contract Vendor consolidation or replacement: A decision is made to consolidate vendors, streamline services, or replace existing vendors to optimize efficiency or address changing business needs. Organizational changes: Mergers, acquisitions, or restructuring within the organization result in the reevaluation or termination of vendor contracts to align with new business structures. The following list of outputs provides examples of key deliverables and outputs of an effective vendor management process. They support alignment with the organizational objectives and establishment of a review, renewal, or termination. of the vendor relationship. signifies the successful conclusion of the vendor's obligations. mutually beneficial relationship between the organization and its vendors. Outputs: Contract terms and conditions Vendor performance reports Vendor relationship management plans Vendor performance improvement plans Vendor risk mitigation plans The engagement in ITSM processes and tools as required and agreed Service catalog and deliverable documentation Compliance and audit attestations Financial and invoice management records Conflict resolution and escalation procedures Knowledge transfer and training materials Contract terms and conditions: This includes SLAs, pricing details, deliverables, payment terms, termination clauses, and other agreed-upon terms, forming the foundation of the vendor-client Vendor performance reports: Regular reports that detail the vendor's performance against defined KPIS, Vendor relationship management plans: Strategies that outline how the organization intends to manage and nurture its relationships with vendors, including communication plans, escalation procedures, and Vendor performance improvement plans: Actionable plans that are formulated based on performance evaluations to address shortcomings, improve service delivery, and meet agreed-upon standards Vendor risk mitigation plans: Documents that detail the identified risks associated with the vendor relationship and strategies to mitigate these risks, ensuring continuity of services and minimizing relationship. SLAS, and benchmarks, highlighting areas of success and improvement. collaboration frameworks. potential disruptions.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 308 The engagement in ITSM processes and tools: A confirmation of the vendor's commitment to engaging in the IT service management (ITSM) processes, adhering to standardized tools, methodologies, and Service catalog and deliverable documentation: This is the service catalog entries and documentation that outline the services to be provided by the vendor, including specifications, timelines, and quality Compliance and audit attestations: This documentation ensures vendor compliance with legal, Financial and invoice management records: These are the records of financial transactions, invoices, Conflict resolution and escalation procedures: These comprise clear protocols for handling conflicts, disputes, or escalations, ensuring a swift resolution of issues that may arise during the vendor-client Knowledge transfer and training materials: These are the materials that facilitate knowledge transfer or training sessions for the organization's staff regarding vendor-provided services, tools, or procedures as agreed upon in the contract. expectations. regulatory, and industry standards as well as reports prepared for audit purposes. payments, and budget allocations related to vendor services. relationship. methodologies. Terminating events Outputs Contract expiration or termination Performance evaluation and benchmarking Completion of deliverables Vendor consolidation or replacement Organizational changes Contract terms and conditions Vendor performance reports Vendor relationship management plans Vendor performance improvement plans Vendor risk mitigation plans Engagement in ITSM processes and tools as required and agreed Service catalog and deliverable documentation Compliance and audit attestations Financial and invoice management records Conflict resolution and escalation procedures Knowledge transfer and training materials Figure 31: Vendor management: terminating events and outputs

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 309 Vendor Management: Themes and Activities The following list represents key themes of the vendor management process and sourcing life cycle. Each theme within the vendor management and sourcing life cycle plays a critical role in different stages of the relationship between the organization and its vendors, from initial planning and selection to the ongoing management of vendor relationships and the eventual conclusion or transition of those Planning and strategy involves outlining the organization's objectives, needs, and requirements regarding vendor sourcing approaches, options, and services. This phase includes defining goals, identifying key stakeholders, establishing criteria for vendor selection, and aligning vendor engagements with the overall business strategy. It also involves budget planning, risk assessment, and determining Vendor selection: This is a structured process involving the request for information (RFI) and request for proposal (RFP) phases. During the RFI phase, potential vendors provide information about their capabilities, services, and solutions, allowing the organization to assess their suitability. In the RFP phase, selected vendors are invited to submit detailed proposals outlining their offerings, pricing, and approaches to meeting the organization's needs. This phase involves evaluation, comparison, and Vendor onboarding: This is the process of integrating a selected vendor into the organization's operations and systems. It includes finalizing contractual agreements, establishing communication channels, providing access to necessary resources or systems, conducting training if required, and ensuring the vendor understands the organization's expectations, processes, and standards. Vendor relationship management involves actively nurturing and managing the ongoing relationships with vendors. This phase includes regular communication, performance monitoring, conducting reviews, addressing concerns or issues, and fostering collaboration to ensure the vendor consistently meets the organization's expectations and supports its goals. It also encompasses the development of Vendor offboarding: This is a structured process of ending a relationship with an existing vendor. It involves completing contractual obligations, settling financial matters, transitioning services back in house or to a new vendor, and ensuring a smooth exit without disruptions to operations. This phase includes closing accounts, transterring data or assets, terminating access rights, and finalizing relationships. the optimal approach to meet the organization's needs through vendor partnerships. selection of the most suitable vendor based on defined criteria. mutual trust and understanding for a successful long-term partnership. documentation to formally conclude the vendor relationship.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 310 The following process activities represent typical steps in a vendor management sourcing life cycle process: Activity Planning and strategy: Establish the requirements and for vendor selection. Description The activities within the planning and strategy phase lay the groundwork for successful vendor engagements by aligning vendor selection and contract negotiations with the organization's overarching objectives, needs, and strategies. processes required 1. Define business objectives and needs: Identify and articulate the organization S goals, objectives, and specific needs that require vendor 2. Establish stakeholder involvement: Engage key stakeholders from various departments or teams to gather diverse perspectives and 3. Conduct market analysis: Research and analyze the market to understand available vendor options, emerging trends, and potential solutions that 4. Assess current vendor landscape: Evaluate existing vendor relationships, performance, and contracts to determine gaps, strengths, and areas for 5. Review the vendor management sourcing policy: Consider policy decisions that impact the type of vendors that may be engaged or are preferred; for example, minority-owned, locally sourced, triple-bottom line focused (economic, social, and environmental), competitive bid, etc. 6. Risk assessment and mitigation planning: Identify potential risks associated with vendor engagements and develop strategies to mitigate 7. Budget planning and allocation: Determine the financial resources available for vendor engagements, considering cost structures, budget 8. Develop vendor selection criteria: Define criteria and parameters for vendor selection such as technical capabilities, service quality, pricing 9. Create the request for information (RFI) and request for proposal (RFP) support. requirements for vendor services. align with organizational needs. improvement. these risks. constraints, and ROI expectations. models, compliance, and cultural fit. templates.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 311 Activity Analysis and selection Description Vendor selection: The analysis and selection phase of a sourcing life cycle is a critical stage in the vendor management sourcing process, during which an organization evaluates potential vendors and selects the best fit for its needs. This phase 1. Requirements gathering: The organization identifies its business needs and requirements for the goods or services it seeks to source. 2. Internal capabilities and existing vendors of record: The vendor manager reviews whether the identified requirements can be met along with internal capabilities and solutions or existing vendor relationships. 3. Request for information (RFI): The organization sends out an RFI to potential vendors, asking for basic: information about their capabilities, 4. Request for proposal (RFP): The organization sends out an RFP to a short list of potential vendors, asking for detailed proposals that outline how they will meet the organization's requirements and specifications. 5. Proposal evaluation: The organization evaluates the proposals received from potential vendors, using predetermined evaluation criteria such as 6. The vendor short list: The organization short-lists a small number of vendors who most closely fit the established requirements for a second 7. Selection: The organization selects the vendor that best meets its needs and requirements and enters into contractual negotiations with them 8. The negotiation and contracting strategy: Developing negotiation strategies, establishing contractual terms, SLAs, pricing models, and other terms and conditions based on the selected vendor's proposals 9. Documentation and approval processes: Preparing documentation related to vendor selection, strategy, and proposed contracts for internal This phase of the vendor management sourcing process helps to ensure that the organization selects the right vendor that can meet its needs and deliver value over time. By gathering requirements, conducting market research, and evaluating proposals, the organization can make an informed decision and negotiate a contract that provides clear expectations and performance metrics typically involves several key activities: experience, and pricing. cost, quality, and delivery time. round of the review and assessment. reviews, approvals, and sign-offs for the vendor.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 312 Activity Vendor onboarding: Initiation and contracting Description The initiation and contracting phase of a sourcing life cycle process comes after the analysis and selection phase. Once the organization has selected a vendor, it needs to establish a legally binding agreement with them that aligns in formality and intent with the vendor classification model. The contract outlines the terms of the relationship that include pricing, scope of work, deliverables, service levels, timelines, and other details. The contracting phase typically involves the following steps: 1. Contract negotiation: The organization and the vendor negotiate the terms of the contract that include pricing, payment terms, service levels, deliverables, warranties, liabilities, and other legal and business terms. 2. Relationship management: The organization establishes the roles, meetings, and service review cadence with the vendor as required to 3. Performance management: The organization establishes and agrees with the vendor performance targets and reporting requirements to support 4. Service delivery and security requirements: The organization and the vendor agree upon the delivery and operational requirements as well as the security controls necessary to be compliant with internal and external 5. Drafting the contract: Once the terms have been agreed upon, a formal contract is drafted that clearly outlines the rights and obligations of both 6. Review and approval: The contract is reviewed by legal counsel, procurement, and other relevant stakeholders to ensure compliance with 7. Signature and execution: The contract is signed by both parties and becomes legally binding. This marks the beginning of the relationship The contracting phase is crucial because it sets the expectations for the entire sourcing relationship. The contract serves as the foundation. for the ongoing management and monitoring of the relationship, because it outlines the roles and responsibilities of both parties and the mechanisms for dispute resolution and change management. A well-drafted contract helps to ensure that the sourcing relationship is aligned with the organization's business support the ongoing relationship management. internal service level targets and agreements. controls. parties. legal and regulatory requirements. between the organization and the vendor. objectives and delivers value while minimizing risks.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 313 Activity Vendor onboarding: Service onboarding Description Onboarding involves transitioning from the sourcing phase to the service delivery phase. The main goal of service onboarding is to establish a smooth and effective transition from the sourcing phase to the service delivery phase by ensuring that all necessary preparations and activities are completed before service delivery begins. Some key onboarding and transition activities Service transition planning: This involves developing a plan to transition from the sourcing phase to the service delivery phase. It includes such activities as defining service delivery roles and responsibilities, identifying risks, developing a communication plan, and establishing a Disengagement planning: This involves developing a plan to disengage from the sourcing relationship. This includes communicating the transition plan to stakeholders, coordinating the transfer of IT assets and resources, and managing the risks associated with the transition. Service design and testing: This involves designing and testing the service to ensure that it meets the organization's requirements and quality standards. This may: involve configuring systems, developing content and service offerings for the service catalog, creating service level agreements (SLAS), and conducting assurance and testing activities. Vendor staff onboarding and offboarding planning: This includes plans for granting system access and security requirements for individuals, training, knowledge retention, and support. It also involves potentially offboarding an existing vendor and staff that is being replaced by a new Training and knowledge transfer: This involves ensuring that all stakeholders from both the service provider and vendor, including end users and support teams, are trained on the new service and have the necessary knowledge and skills to use and support it. Service transition and go-live: This involves executing the plan, deploying the service, and validating that the service is working as expected. This may include data migration, service activation, and during service onboarding: governance framework. vendor. cutover activities.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 314 Activity Vendor relationship management: Service delivery and operations Description Service delivery and operations is the phase in a sourcing life cycle where the service is delivered, and ongoing operations are managed. This phase involves the day-to-day activities of delivering the service and maintaining its quality and performance over time. Examples of key ITSM process integrations during this phase: Service level management: This involves monitoring and managing the performance of the service against the agreed-upon SLAs and taking corrective action as necessary to ensure that service levels are met. Incident and problem management: This involves identifying, tracking, and resolving incidents and problems that arise during service delivery. It: may involve troubleshooting, root cause analysis, and developing and Change management: This involves managing changes of the service that includes assessing the impact of changes, testing and validating changes, and implementing changes in a controlled and coordinated manner. Continuous improvement: This involves identifying opportunities for improving the service and making changes to improve its quality, performance, and efficiency over time. This may involve conducting service reviews, analyzing metrics and data, and implementing process implementing corrective actions. improvements.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 315 Activity Vendor offboarding: Completion and transition-out Description The contract completion and transition-out phase of a sourcing life cycle is the final stage in the vendor management sourcing process. It is the phase in which the organization and the vendor complete their contractual obligations and transition out of the sourcing relationship. The main goal of this phase is to ensure that the organization receives all the contracted services and IT assets while minimizing risk and disruption to ongoing operations. The contract completion and transition-out phase typically involves the 1. Contract completion: This involves ensuring that all contractual obligations have been met by both parties. This may involve completing final deliverables, closing out financial obligations, and conducting a final 2. Asset and data transfer: This involves transterring the ownership of IT assets and data from the vendor to the organization. This may include transferring intellectual property, confidential information, and other IT assets that were created or maintained by the vendor during the sourcing 3. Staff and resource transition: This may involve transitioning staff and resources that were employed by the vendor of the organization or a new vendor. This may include reassigning personnel, transferring knowledge, 4. Security review: This involves auditing and ensuring that all vendor and vendor resource system access has been shut off, and that all IT assets provided to vendor resources are returned, data is backed up, and the IT 5. Post-transition review: This involves conducting a review of the sourcing relationship, assessing the vendor's performance, identifying lessons learned for vendor management, and capturing best practices for future The contract completion and transition-out phase is critical to ensuring a smooth and successful transition from the sourcing relationship to the post sourcing phase. By carefully managing the transition, organizations can minimize the risk of disrupting the ongoing operations, maintain business continuity, and ensure that they receive the full value of the contracted following steps: review of the service. relationship. and providing training. assets are wiped. sourcing relationships. services and IT assets.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 316 Vendor Management: Actors and Roles The following vendor management actors and key stakeholders play a crucial role in different stages of the vendor management and sourcing life cycle, contributing their expertise and perspectives to ensure Executive leadership/senior management: Provides strategic direction, supports decision-making, and approves major vendor engagements. They ensure alignment between vendor relationships and the Vendor relationship managers: Oversee ongoing relationships with vendors and performance evaluations, address issues or escalations, and ensure vendors fulfil service level agreements and Procurement managers: Responsible for overseeing the financial and compliance aspects of contract negotiation and contract management. They ensure adherence to procurement policies, seek cost Business unit representatives: Provide input regarding specific business needs, objectives, and requirements for vendor services. They collaborate with procurement to ensure the selected vendors IT manager/technology specialists: Provide technical expertise and requirements for the IT-related vendor services. They contribute to vendor selection criteria, assess technical capabilities, and oversee Legal counsel/contract managers: Review, negotiate, and draft contracts to ensure compliance with legal and regulatory standards. They safeguard the organization's interests in contractual agreements and Finance department representatives: Manage budget allocations, financial analysis, and payments related to vendor services. They ensure financial transparency, adherence to budgetary constraints, and Risk and compliance managers: Assess and mitigate risks associated with vendor engagements, ensuring vendors comply with regulatory requirements and security standards. They oversee risk Project managers: Oversee the implementation of vendor solutions, manage project timelines, and coordinate activities between internal teams and vendors to ensure successful project delivery. End users: Provide feedback, requirements, and their perspective about vendor services based on their experience as end users. They contribute insights regarding service quality and usability. successful vendor partnerships aligned with the organization's goals and needs. organization's overall objectives. deliverables. effective solutions, and manage relationships with vendors. align with their departmental goals. the implementation of IT solutions. manage legal aspects of vendor relationships. optimal utilization of resources. mitigation strategies and ensure vendor compliance.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 317 All the processes have the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process: Vendor relationship manager The vendor relationship manager (VRM) is accountable to the VM process owner and performs the activities related to the VM sourcing life cycle process. In general, the VRM oversees the following activities: Developing and improving, over time, the VM strategy, planning, and vendor classifications Establishing VM governance roles and frameworks for each vendor relationship and contract. This should include clear communication channels and escalation processes for different forms Establishing VM performance targets, metrics, and reporting requirements; working with key Aiding in the development and review of SLAS, contracts, agreements, and any other documents Identifying key contacts within the internal service providers and external vendors for contact purposes and involvement in ongoing relationship management meetings and formal service Ensuring that value for money is obtained through all IT service provider vendors and contracts Ensuring that vendor resources are integrated within internal ITSM processes based on their Reviewing and performing a risk analysis of vendor contracts and agreements on a regular basis Working closely with service level management; ensuring that all vendor contracts, agreements, or SLAs are aligned with and support the agreed-upon requirements of the business In as sourcing alliance scenario, ensuring that all roles and relationships between the prime vendor and any subcontracted vendors are documented, maintained, and subject to contractual In a sourcing alliance scenario, reviewing prime vendor processes to ensure that any Performing contract reviews at least annually; ensuring that all contracts are consistent with Updating contracts, when required; ensuring that the policies of change management process are Maintaining a process to deal with contractual disputes and ensuring that any disputes are dealt Maintaining a process for dealing with the early end, or unexpected end of a contract, or transfer Monitoring, reporting, and regularly reviewing vendor performance against targets, identifying of issues such as operations, financial, security, and performance concerns stakeholders and in coordination with service level management for vendors reviews vendor classification type agreement subcontracted vendors are meeting their contractual obligations organizational requirements and standard terms and conditions followed with in an efficient and effective manner out of services improvement actions, and ensuring these actions are implemented

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Sourcing contract manager/procurement 318 An IT services contract or procurement manager is a role dedicated to the tactical and operational elements of sourcing and contract management. As indicated in this guide, this role may often report to a financial management function of the organization. For transactional or commodity-type vendor relationships, this role may manage the full sourcing life cycle with the engagement of key IT service providers and customer stakeholders. The general activities of contract and procurement management may include: Developing and implementing procurement policies and procedures Identifying, evaluating, and selecting transactional vendors for the organization Negotiating contracts and agreements with vendors to ensure favorable terms and conditions Managing vendor relationships and performance to ensure high-quality goods and services are Managing procurement-related data and systems such as purchase orders, contracts, and vendor Monitoring and reporting on procurement activities that include cost savings, vendor Negotiating and agreeing upon IT service provider vendor contracts in accordance with the Ensuring that all negotiated vendor contracts accurately and sufficiently underpin all service level Actively managing and monitoring the performance of all IT service provider vendors according Reporting on a regular basis the performance of IT service provider vendors against the terms Managing, reporting, and escalating IT service provider vendor performance issues and concerns delivered on time and at the best price databases performance, and compliance with regulations and company policies policies, goals, and objectives of the vendor management process requirements and agreed-upon service level targets to the terms and conditions of the contracts and conditions of the contracts Service delivery manager A service delivery manager (SDM) is responsible for ensuring that an organization's services are delivered to clients or customers in a timely, efficient, and effective manner. The SDM will work closely with vendor management and may be either an internal-provider employee or a vendor-supplied role for outsourced services. In either case, the SDM is a key role in the process support or as a stakeholder for VM. The SDM role may vary depending on the industry, organizational size, and the specific services provided, but here are some common duties and responsibilities: Managing service delivery processes that include internal and external resources to ensure service delivery that involves defining and documenting processes, identifying areas for Ensuring customer satisfaction by working with customers to assess and validate that they are satisfied with the services they receive and identifying areas where improvements can be made Monitoring service performance against established service level agreements (SLAS) and key performance indicators (KPIS) and ensuring that services are delivered in accordance with the improvement, and overseeing service delivery teams to enhance customer experience established standards

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 319 Managing service escalations of the service issues by working with service delivery teams and Communicating, with stakeholders, including customers, service delivery teams, and senior management, to ensure everyone is aligned with service delivery goals and expectations Managing service delivery teams, including providing coaching, mentoring, and support to team members, and ensuring the teams are adequately resourced and trained to deliver services Managing budgets and resources required to deliver services; this includes identifying areas customers to resolve issues in a timely and effective manner effectively where resources can be optimized or efficiencies can be gained Vendor Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) Here are the critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Vendor relationships and their related products and services are managed to support business value realization and improvement. KPIS: Increase the number of vendors meeting the targets within the contract A reduction. in the number of breaches of contractual targets Improved customer satisfaction with external services The percentage of end-users satisfied with external vendor services CSF: The business is protected from poor vendor performance or disruption. KPIs: A reduction in the number of service outages caused by vendor services A reduction in the number of service target breaches (outages and non-outages) caused A reduction of security and risk-related incidents or issues from vendor services A reduction. in the number of compliance or regulatory findings related to vendor by vendors services CSF: Vendor relationships are managed appropriately according to classification, value, and risk. KPIS: An increase in the number of service and contractual reviews held with the vendors A decrease in the number of service or contracts disputes A decrease in the average time to remediate or facilitate vendor disputes

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 320 CSF: There is clear ownership of vendor and contractual issues and dispute management. KPIS: A reduction in the amount of time to develop vendor and contract requirements A reduction in the amount of time to evaluate vendors and contracts A reduction in the amount of time to select vendors and contracts (including negotiation) Vendor Management: Integrations The vendor management process is integrated with many different IT service management processes that include service strategy, service level, security, and service support processes. The following are a few key examples of critical integrations. Service level management Vendor-provided services need to be assessed and sourced in such a way that they support business and stakeholder requirements. Any changes to services provided by vendors need to be assessed against service levels, and reporting from service providers is needed to evaluate the alignment of services with expectations. Service level management activities To provide information to vendor management about existing service level agreements to assist in the negotiation of the agreed-upon changes to vendor contracts To ensure the delivery of the vendor service level performance reports Tot track vendor performance against service level agreements (SLAs) to ensure that vendors meet contractual obligations and take appropriate actions if vendors fail to meet SLAs To ensure the participation of vendors in regular service reviews and assist in the development To assist with the facilitation and communication of the service level management-related or related service improvement plans contract disputes Incident management Vendor-provided services require engagement from service providers in the form of resources and staff to enable knowledge management and second and/or third-level support roles. The integration off third party services, such as cloud providers, requires careful consideration of the support requirements for the ongoing service delivery: Providing information. to vendor management to support negotiating contracts; representing the Reviewing and improving contract terms and conditions regarding the vendor requirements and Assisting with vendor communication and incident management-related contract disputes Participating in the major incident resolution escalation and communication related to vendor support models and requirements of incident management responsibilities related to incident management supplied services

Chapter 14: Vendor Management Problem management 321 Vendor involvement in identifying and removing problems from the service environment is a critical success factor for service relationships. Vendors are required to provide problem investigation and analysis support as well as contribute to publishing knowledge-based articles related to known issues and workarounds. Here are some common vendor-related activities within problem management: Procuring and engaging with vendors to resolve problems related to their products or services Ensuring that vendor contracts include requirements for the capture, management, improvement, and communication of knowledge artifacts related to problems and known issues Participating in and/or facilitating a problem root cause analysis with vendors Facilitating and managing the escalation process with vendors to ensure a timely resolution of problems and ensuring that vendor escalation paths are clearly defined and communicated Facilitating and escalating contract disputes related to the repeated incidents and risk-related Vendor-related activities within problem management typically involve working with vendors or third party suppliers to resolve issues related to hardware, software, or services they provide to the service issues organization. Vendor Management: Enablers The following list provides examples of key enablers for an effective and efficient vendor management process. These enablers and critical success factors. When effectively integrated into the vendor management process, they enhance efficiency, minimize risks, foster strong vendor relationships, and Vendor management often involves the use of technology to streamline processes and improve efficiency. ensure the delivery of quality services that align with the organization's objectives. Below are specific examples of technology requirements for vendor management. Tools and technologies Vendor management software (VMS): VMS platforms streamline vendor data, contracts, performance metrics, and communications in one centralized system. They facilitate tracking vendor activities, Performance monitoring and analytics tools: Tools that allow real-time monitoring of vendor performance against SLAs, KPIS, and benchmarks. Analytics software provides insights into Collaboration and communication platforms: These tools, such as project management software, messaging apps, and collaboration platforms, foster efficient communication and collaboration between internal teams and vendors. They facilitate document sharing, task assignments, and issue resolution. Contract management software: This type of software allows organizations to create, store, and manage contracts with vendors. It can help ensure that all parties are meeting their contractual obligations, track automating workflows, and generating reports for informed decision-making. performance trends enabling proactive measures for improvement. key dates and milestones, and provide alerts when contracts are about to expire.

Chapter 14: Vendor Management 322 Payment processing and invoicing software: Payment processing and invoicing software can help automate the payment process and ensure that vendors are paid in a timely manner. This can help maintain good vendor relationships and reduce the risk of disputes over payments. Resources: The skilled vendor management team: A dedicated team or vendor management office with expertise in procurement, contract management, relationship building, and negotiation is essential. They ensure effective vendor selection, contract negotiation, and ongoing relationship management. Subject matter experts (SMES): Access to SMEs across various domains ensures informed decision making during vendor selection, technical evaluations, and implementation phases. SMEs contribute Training and development programs: Continuous training programs for internal stakeholders involved in vendor management ensure a deep understanding of processes, compliance standards, and effective valuable insights and requirements. communication strategies. Processes: Robust vendor selection criteria and process: Clear and well-defined criteria for vendor selection ensure alignment with organizational goals, performance expectations, compliance requirements, and cultural Comprehensive contract management procedures: Standardized contract templates, defined SLAS, and regular reviews facilitate effective contract management. Clear terms, performance metrics, and exit Ongoing relationship and performance management processes: Established processes and recurring meetings for ongoing relationship management, regular performance evaluations, feedback mechanisms, and continuous improvement initiatives strengthen vendor relationships and service fit.. A structured process ensures fairness and transparency. strategies minimize risks and ensure accountability. delivery.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management (ITAM) IT asset management (ITAM) is a management process focused on tracking, managing, and optimizing the use of IT assets. The ITAM process is a subset of and supporting capability to business asset and risk management and should be executed consistently across both internal and external service providers. The ITAM process supports the enterprise to achieve benefits that include financial, legal, security, risk management, and overall service management optimization. All enterprises are subject to contractual requirements in the purchase, use, and disposal of IT assets as well as legal and industry-driven The ITAM process should be considered, developed, implemented, and managed as part of the overall service management program. ITAM is not separate from service management, but rather is a core element of service management. As such, the policies, controls, and objectives must be included as part of the strategic and tactical elements of the overall service management program. The ITAM process must also be integrated within the service management program at the operational level. This means the ITAM activities can be accomplished through many of the most common management processes that already exist in service management such as service request, release and deployment, change, incident, and regulatory requirements in the purchase, transfer, use, and disposal of IT assets. problem management. IT Asset Management: Purpose and Objectives while managing regulatory, compliance, and security risks The key objectives of IT asset management: Purpose: To identify and manage the full life cycle of all IT assets and ensure their value is optimized Manage and care for IT assets throughout their life cycle from acquisition, inventory, use, and to Ensure that IT assets are effectively managed to meet their financial, contractual, regulatory, and Ensure that IT assets are properly installed, moved, added to, changed, or removed from the disposal compliance requirements production environment Ensure that IT assets are properly used according to policies Ensure that IT assets are properly controlled in inventory and securely stored Ensure that IT assets are properly acquired or developed Ensure that the value of IT assets are quantified and optimized for usage and maintenance

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 324 Provide management with assurance that the IT asset inventory and records are complete and accurate ITAM helps organizations to achieve the following benefits: Reduce costs and optimize investments by eliminating unnecessary or underutilized assets, consolidating licenses and contracts, and negotiating better deals with vendors Enhance performance and availability by monitoring and maintaining the health, configuration, and security of IT assets as well as ensuring timely upgrades and replacements Mitigate risks and ensure compliance by tracking and reporting on the ownership, location, status, and usage of IT assets as well as adherence to the relevant standards, policies, and Support business transformation and innovation by enabling faster and easier deployment, integration, and management of IT assets as well as facilitating the adoption of new technologies A mature ITAM practice requires a clear vision, a well-defined process, a dedicated team, a supportive culture, and an effective toolset. By implementing ITAM best practices, organizations can improve their regulations and practices IT service delivery, business performance, and customer satisfaction.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management IT Asset Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"2 325 "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial to achieving the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement A single repository All IT assets will be registered in a single IT asset repository is: "All IT assets must be single repository within 24 hours of acquisition, modification, or disposal." The reason for the policy A single repository is a centralized database that stores all the information about the IT assets, such as their location, status, ownership, single repository enables auditing, and analysis of IT assets. It also facilitates the integration of ITAM with other IT processes, such as request management, security management, and change management. Classification standards are the criteria that define how IT assets are categorized and grouped based on their characteristics, such as type, function, criticality, and the life cycle stage. Benefits Avoiding confusion and information. errors caused by multiple Avoiding the duplication of efforts Promotes an efficient and effective IT asset management program IT asset sources system. An example policy for this area configuration, and history. A registered and updated in the accurate and timely reporting, Classification standards All IT assets developed or brought into the organization must be assessed for their classification as an IT asset based on, but not limited to, aspects of financial, legal, security, and compliance. An example policy for this area is: "All IT assets must be classified according to the predefined standards and assigned a unique identifier." Classification standards help to determine the appropriate level of management and control for each IT asset. They enable consistent and meaningful communication as well as reports about the IT assets across the organization. They minimize legal, security, and compliance risks. 21 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management Policy statement Usage Assets are used for their intended business purpose. 326 The reason for the policy Usage management is the process of ensuring that IT assets are used in accordance with their intended purpose Benefits Ensures appropriate use and reporting of asset information Reduces liability risks of the organization in the case of unauthorized use of organizational assets People are aware of and will comply with the rules, processes, and procedures of the IT asset program. Promotes effective IT asset management program All IT assets given to or in the and by authorized users. Usage possession of individuals and management helps to prevent groups must include policies of unauthorized access, misuse, use that support the IT asset program and are understood and acknowledged. Elements include but are not limited to: Expectations for the privacy of information The proper use and security of IT assets Downloading software The use of personal IT assets The recovery and reuse of IT assets An example policy for this area is: "All IT assets must be used only for official business purposes and by authorized users. Any unauthorized or inappropriate use of IT assets must be reported and investigated." or abuse of IT assets. It also helps to optimize the utilization and performance of IT assets. an efficient and

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management Policy statement A review cycle All IT assets are audited at regular intervals for accuracy in regards to the IT asset repository. 327 The reason for the policy A review cycle is a regular interval at which IT assets are assessed and evaluated for their current value, performance, condition, and compliance. A review cycle gaps in the ITAM process and helps to update or dispose of needed or useful. Benefits The IT asset repository can be trusted as a source of information for making decisions. Deficiencies in policies and processes (such as change control) can be identified and improved. Minimizes legal, security, and compliance risks due to discrepancies in the IT environment compared to the IT asset repository The IT asset repository can be trusted as a source of information. for making decisions. Minimizes legal, security, and compliance risks due to discrepancies in the IT environment compared to the IT asset repository An example policy for this area helps to identify any issues or reviewed at least once a year to take corrective actions. It also completeness, and relevance." the IT assets that are no longer is: "All IT assets must be verify their accuracy, Change control All changes to identified IT assets are recorded and controlled. The IT asset repository is considered a single source of truth for asset identification and recorded attributes. IT Asset Management: Terms and Definitions IT asset: Any physical, logical, or virtual component that needs to be tracked and managed for financial and/or risk-based reasons Some examples of IT assets: Hardware devices, such as laptops, desktops, servers, routers, switches, printers, scanners, etc. Software applications and associated licenses, operating systems, databases, web servers, email clients, antivirus programs, etc. Network resources, such as IP addresses, domain names, firewalls, VPNs, etc. Cloud services, such as storage, computing, backup, security, etc. Some examples that would not be an IT asset: Office furniture, such as desks, chairs, cabinets, etc. Office supplies, such as paper, pens, staplers, etc. Human resources, such as employees, contractors, consultants, etc. Physical facilities, such as buildings, parking lots, elevators, etc.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 328 The capitalization threshold: What is and what is not considered to be an asset is often based on a capitalization threshold, which is the minimum cost at which an IT asset must be reflected in accounting records and financial statements. Tracking IT assets below a defined threshold can mean more work. However, there are also many benefits to potentially increasing the scope of IT asset management. IT resources that may fall below a threshold, like keyboards, mice, or e-readers, need to be tracked from a risk or an inventory perspective for security purposes, to be more easily tracked if lost or stolen, or to support prder/replenishment goals for financial procurement reasons. While potentially not under the scope of IT asset management, tracking and managing these resources as a form of inventory management that includes their location, the individuals responsible for them, and their useful life can The IT asset repository: Information stored about the assets, including those in use and those in storage, Software asset management (SAM): A system of business processes that monitors, evaluates, and Hardware asset management (HAM): A system of business processes that monitors, evaluates, and Standard IT assets: Those IT assets, or a combination of IT assets, as well as the IT asset vendors, that are Non-standard IT assets: Those IT assets that are NOT preapproved for use and must be uniquely Contract terms and conditions: Documenting the rights and responsibilities of the parties to the contract Software licenses are considered a contract document that typically covers the product use rights. help limit theft and enable better budgeting for their replacement. that provides a logical representation of the IT asset inventory manages software assets, including software licenses manages hardware assets across the life of the asset preapproved for use assessed when requested Product use rights are the terms under which the applications can be used. Warranty: A usually written guarantee of the integrity of a product and of the maker's responsibility for IT equipment lease: A contract by which one conveys IT equipment for a specified term and for a Return merchandise authorization (RMA): This is a document used to return a product, receive a refund, request a replacement, or have the product repaired. Products that are returned without an RMA can be refused or subject to a restocking fee by the retailer. Thus, it is important to obtain an RMA before IT asset portfolio: IT assets that are within the scope of the IT asset management capability and Software: This is an aggregation term used to describe computer programs, applications, and operating Application: A set of compiled instructions that can be run on a computing platform or device for the repair or replacement of defective parts specified payment or series of payments returning any merchandise. management systems systems that process or support the processing of digital information. collecting, saving, processing, and presenting data

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management processing of digital information. 329 Hardware: All or part of the physical or virtually defined equipment that processes or supports the IT Asset Management: Triggering Events and Inputs Triggering events: The acquisition of new IT assets The disposal of IT assets A transfer or relocation of IT assets A change in IT asset configuration or status An audit or compliance requirement The acquisition of new IT assets: Refers to the process of obtaining or procuring new technological resources or equipment for an organization's IT infrastructure. It involves purchasing or acquiring new hardware, software, or other technology-related resources to enhance or expand the existing IT The disposal of IT assets: Involves the removal or retirement of outdated, obsolete, or no longer needed IT assets from an organization's inventory. The disposal can include selling, recycling, donating, or A transfer or relocation of IT assets: Indicates the movement or shifting ofIT resources from one location to another within an organization. It could also involve non-use and under-utilization as a reason to transfer or relocate (recover) an asset. It involves physically or virtually moving hardware, software, or data from one place to another, which could be due to operational restructuring, expansion, or other A change in IT asset configuration or status: Refers to any modification, adjustment, or update made to the setup, attributes, or status of IT assets. It could involve changes in hardware configurations, software settings, permissions, or any alteration that affects the functioning or attributes of the IT resources. An audit or compliance requirement: Signifies the necessity to conduct an assessment, review, or examination. of IT assets and related processes to ensure adherence to industry regulations, organizational policies, or compliance standards. Audits are performed to validate the accuracy, security, capabilities. securely discarding hardware, software, or other technological resources. organizational changes. and compliance of IT assets and their management practices. Inputs: An IT asset request form Requests linked to IT assets The IT asset repository The validation and verification of IT assets Internal and external audits Acquisitions and mergers Policies Other?

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 330 An IT asset request form: A form or template used by employees or departments within an organization to formally request IT assets. These assets could be hardware (like computers, printers), software (like licenses for specific programs), or other technology-related tools. The: form typically: includes details such Requests linked to IT assets: These are submitted request related to IT assets within an organization. This can involve requests for new assets, updates to existing assets, maintenance needs, or even decommissioning of outdated equipment. These requests are usually tracked and managed in a service The IT asset repository: A centralized database or inventory where all IT assets of an organization are recorded and managed. It includes detailed information about each asset, such as type, specifications, purchase date, lifespan, warranty, and user details. The repository helps in managing the assets The validation and verification ofl IT assets: This refers to the processes used to ensure that IT assets are legitimate, licensed, and compliant with organizational standards and policies. Validation typically involves checking that the assets meet the required specifications and purposes, while verification Internal and external audits: In the context of IT asset management internal audits are conducted by an organization's own audit team to assess the efficiency, security, and compliance of its IT systems and processes. External audits are performed by independent entities to ensure that the organization meets external standards and regulatory requirements. Both types of audits help in identifying risks and Acquisitions and mergers: In the IT domain, this refers to the process where one company acquires or merges with another, and there is a need to integrate different IT systems, assets, and policies. This can involve significant challenges in harmonizing technologies, data, and security protocols between the Policies: Policies are formal guidelines that dictate how various aspects of IT are managed within an organization. This can include usage policies for IT assets, security policies, data management policies, and policies for IT procurement and maintenance. These policies are crucial for maintaining order, as the type of asset requested, the reason for the request, and the intended user. management solution to ensure efficient use of IT resources. efficiently throughout their lifecycle. ensures that the assets are properly accounted for and are being used appropriately. improving IT governance. merging entities. security, and efficiency in the ase of IT resources. Triggering events The acquisition of new IT assets The disposal of IT assets Thet transfer or relocation of IT assets A change in IT asset configuration or status An audit or compliance requirement Inputs Anl IT asset request form Requests linked to IT assets Thel IT asset repository The validation and verification ofIT assets Internal and external audits Acquisitions and mergers Policies Other? Figure 32: IT asset management: triggering events and inputs

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 331 IT Asset Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: Completed IT asset labeling and documentation IT assets relocated or transferred ITa assets disposed of A satisfied audit or compliance review The IT asset management process is a set of activities that ensures the optimal use and control of IT assets throughout their life cycle. The process ends when one of the following terminating events occurs: Completed IT asset labeling and documentation: This means the IT asset has been properly identified, registered, and recorded in the IT asset inventory system and that all relevant information about its IT assets relocated or transferred: This means that the IT asset has been moved to a different physical or logical location, or that its ownership or responsibility has been transferred to another person or entity, IT assets disposed of: This means that the IT asset has been retired, decommissioned, or discarded, either because it is no longer needed, functional, or supported or because it has reached the end of its useful A satisfied audit or compliance review: This means the IT asset has passed an internal or external audit or compliance review that verifies it meets the organization's policies, standards, and regulations and configuration, location, ownership, and status has been updated. either within or outside the organization. life or warranty period. that it is aligned with the business objectives and requirements. Outputs: Approvals and rejections Purchase orders Final IT asset uispositions An updated IT asset repository Discovery results and follow-up actions Documents from acquisition, life cycle management, and disposal Approvals and rejections are the decisions madel by the IT asset manager or other stakeholders regarding the requests for IT assets. These approvals and rejections are communicated to the requesters and Purchase orders are the documents that authorize the procurement of IT assets from vendors. Purchase orders specify the quantity, price, delivery date, and other terms and conditions of the purchase. Purchase orders are also recorded in the IT asset repository and tracked until the receipt of the IT assets. Final IT asset dispositions are the actions taken to dispose of IT assets that are no longer needed, useful, or functional. Final IT asset dispositions may include selling, donating, recycling, or destroying the IT assets, depending on their condition and value. Final IT asset dispositions are also recorded in the IT recorded in the IT asset repository. asset repository and reported to the relevant authorities.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 332 An updated IT asset repository: This is the central database that stores all the information about the IT assets owned or used by the organization. The IT asset repository is updated regularly with the data collected from the acquisition, life cycle management, and disposal of IT assets. The updated IT asset repository provides a comprehensive and accurate view of the IT asset inventory and status. Discovery results and follow-up actions are the outcomes of the periodic or ad hoc scans or audits of the IT assets to verify their existence, location, configuration, and compliance. Discovery results identify any discrepancies or issues with the IT assets such as missing, misplaced, unauthorized, or noncompliant assets. Follow-up actions are the corrective or preventive measures taken to resolve these issues and Documents from acquisition, life cycle management, and disposal are the records that document the processes and activities involved in managing the IT assets throughout their life cycle. These documents may include contracts, invoices, receipts, warranties, licenses, maintenance logs, service requests, incident reports, change requests, disposal certificates, and others. These documents provide evidence ensure alignment with the IT asset management policies and standards. of compliance and accountability for the IT assets. Terminating event Outputs Completed IT asset labeling and documentation, ITa assets relocated or transferred ITa assets disposed Satisfied audit or compliance review Approvals and rejections Purchase orders Final IT asset dispositions Updated IT asset repository Discovery results and follow-up actions Documents from acquisition, life cycle management, and disposal Figure 33: IT asset management: terminating events and outputs IT Asset Management: Themes and Activities IT asset management contains a broad set of themes and activities that span both the IT and business organizations and, quite often, involves teams outside of IT asset management to carry out the activities. For this reason, an ITAM program is best implemented following a formal structured approach. The ITa assetidentification and tracking: This theme involves creating and maintaining an accurate inventory of all IT assets such as hardware, software, licenses, and contracts. The activities include discovering, registering, labeling, scanning, and updating IT assets throughout their life cycle. The benefits of this Cost optimization: This theme involves minimizing the total cost of ownership (TCO) and maximizing the return on investment (ROI) of IT assets. The activities include planning, budgeting, forecasting, negotiating, procuring, allocating, and optimizing IT assets based on business needs and priorities. The benefits of this theme are reduced waste, increased savings, and the enhanced value of IT assets. following is a list of key themes for asset management: theme are improved visibility, accountability, and the compliance of IT assets.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 333 The management of risk: This theme involves identifying, assessing, mitigating, and monitoring the risks associated with IT assets. The activities include conducting risk analysis, implementing security controls, enforcing policies and standards, performing audits and reviews, and reporting incidents and issues. The benefits of this theme are increased security, reliability, and the performance of IT assets. End of life: This theme involves managing the disposal or retirement of IT assets that are no longer needed or supported. The activities include decommissioning, sanitizing, recycling, donating, or selling IT assets in accordance with legal and environmental regulations. The benefits of this theme are reduced clutter, improved sustainability, and the recovered value of IT assets. Example: A laptop life cycle This is the story of al new laptop that was purchased by a company to support its remote workers. The laptop was delivered to the IT department, where it was registered in the IT asset inventory system and assigned a unique ID. It was then configured with the necessary software and security settings and tested for functionality and performance. It was ready tol be deployed to the end user. The laptop was shipped to Bob, a sales manager who worked from home. Bob was happy to receive the new laptop, because his old laptop was slow and unreliable. He logged in with his credentials and started using it for his daily tasks. He appreciated the speed, battery life, and design. He also liked that he could access the company's network and resources securely through The laptop served Bob well for two years until one day it started having some issues. It would freeze, crash, or reboot randomly and sometimes display error messages. Bob contacted the IT department and reported the problems. The IT staff remotely diagnosed the laptop and found out that it had a faulty hard drive. They decided that the laptop needed to be replaced, because The laptop was sent back to the IT department where it was wiped of all data and marked as retired in the IT asset inventory system. It was then disposed of in an environmentally friendly way, following the company's policies and regulations. The laptop's life cycle as an IT asset had the new laptop. repairing it would be too costly and time-consuming. come to an end. Example process activities: Planning and budgeting for IT asset needs Procuring and deploying IT assets Maintaining and updating IT assets Monitoring and auditing IT assets Disposing and retiring IT assets

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 334 IT asset management activities are often grouped into subsets of SAM and HAM. However, the program is structured, an overall set of high-level steps and activities can be defined for managing IT assets across their life cycle as described in the following table: Activity IT asset tracking: Procurement and acquisition Description There are many avenues and many ways that assets can enter an where and how, begin with a formal request that is backed up with an organization-wide policy for compliance. Activities within this step: identification and organization. It is critical to ensure that all IT asset acquisitions, regardless of Identifying and reviewing requests The justification of and approval for IT assets Purchasing, obtaining from inventory, or developing The purchase receipt and validation The IT asset registration The purchase authorization for payment The end of the acquisition step triggers the life cycle management step.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 335 Activity IT asset tracking: Maintaining and updating IT asset through their life cycle Monitoring and auditing Description Life cycle management begins when a new IT asset is staged, deployed, and IT asset must then be controlled and managed on an ongoing basis until it's The majority of time and effort within an ITAM program is spent at this stage. There are multiple activities that occur in parallel and in no particular order. Many of these activities are not carried out directly by the ITAM program but are carried out by other teams on behalf of the program. As with IT asset acquisition, the activities conducted outside of the ITAM team must be backed up with organization-wide policies for compliance. Activities within this step: identification and released for use or is placed in inventory for future use. In both situations, the withdrawn from the life cycle stage. Deployment and release Life cycle management: This activity involves other multiple capability areas that work with and on behalf of the ITAM program, including but not limited to: Change management Configuration management Release and deployment management Incident management Problem management Request management Inventory management and control: a This is a critical ITAM activity typically carried out within the ITAM team, which is best known as discovery.' There are two essential considerations required for this activity: A system discovery of IT assets only discovers IT assets that are powered on and connected to the network. Manual inventory checks therefore are required to supplement the systematic discovery. Recovery and reuse: IT assets must be periodically assessed for being underutilized or for being no longer fit for their original purpose. Such IT assets will be withdrawn from operations and will trigger an assessment for retirement. Retirement considerations; IT assets withdrawn from operations may be reused in the same or a new capacity or may have reached the end of their useful life. This activity will then trigger the next stage of the IT asset disposal. The recovery and reuse of IT assets and their retirement considerations trigger the IT asset disposal step.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 336 Cost optimization: By focusing on thorough asset tracking, compliance management, life cycle optimization, and leveraging data-driven insights, IT asset management minimize unnecessary expenses, avoid penalties, and make strategic IT asset management support the goal of effective and efficient use of IT Software and hardware management significantly contributes to cost optimization, decisions regarding their IT investments. resources through a series of focus areas: Total cost of ownership (TCO): organizations helping license Inventory and assessment: Conducting the thorough inventory and assessment of all IT assets to understand their acquisition costs, maintenance expenses, and depreciation over time Life cycle management: Tracking assets throughout their life cycle to identify opportunities for cost-saving, such as optimizing maintenance schedules, extending usable life, or timely disposal/replacement License compliance monitoring: Ensuring compliance with software licenses to avoid penalties or fines resulting from non-compliance Optimization of license usage: Identifying underutilized licenses and reallocating them where needed, reducing unnecessary purchases and Negotiation power: Accurate tracking of software licenses provides leverage during negotiations with vendors for better pricing or contract Software license management: subscription costs terms. Hardware management: Inventory management: Maintaining an up-to-date inventory of hardware assets to ensure efficient utilization and reducing redundant Life cycle planning: Planning hardware refresh cycles strategically, considering maintenance costs, warranty expiration, and technological purchases advancements to optimize expenditure. Penalty avoidance: Compliance monitoring: Regularly tracking license agreements and usage to prevent non-compliance that may lead to penalties or legal issues Vendor relationship management: Working with vendor management to build strong vendor relationships to proactively address compliance issues and negotiate settlements if discrepancies arise Optimized life cycle management: Scheduled refresh cycles: Planning hardware and software refreshes based on their life cycle, optimizing performance while avoiding excessive spending on outdated assets

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 337 Activity Description Cost avoidance through efficiency: Resource allocation: Optimizing resource allocation by identifying over provisioned or underutilized assets, reallocating or decommissioning Standardization and consolidation: Standardizing hardware and software to streamline support, reducing complexity, and negotiating volume them as needed discounts Internal audits: The management of risk: IT asset audits This activity is required to ensure that the organization is: Following ITAM processes, procedures, and adhering to Compliant to organizational, legal, and contractual policies requirements External audits: Performed by IT asset vendors or their representatives Prepared using the internal audits proactively Risk mitigation through refreshing: Timely refreshes minimize the risk of system failures, security vulnerabilities, and operational disruptions due to outdated or unsupported hardware/software. The management Managing IT asset documents is an essential activity in an ITAM program. IT of risk: IT asset document management asset documents comprise proof of IT asset ownership and proof of compliance. For these reasons, all IT asset-related documents must be identified and managed in a secure and controlled manner. As with the other IT asset management stages, most of the IT asset documents are not directly managed by the ITAM program but by other teams on behalf of the program. It: is imperative that critical documents needed to achieve the goals and objectives of the ITAM program are identified as part of the activities within the other stages for acquisition, life cycle management, and disposal. Documents, such as proof of purchase, lease agreements, and service contracts, require teams outside of the ITAM program to be aware of the links to the ITAM program and to manage the security and control of such documents in alignment with ITAM policies. Other documents, such as hardware IT asset certificates of destruction, typically reside within the ITAM program.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 338 Activity End of life: Disposal and retirement Description IT asset disposal begins when an IT asset has been removed from regular use and will trigger different disposal activities based on the retirement decisions. A best practice for all recovered IT hardware assets is to data (for security reasons) and recover all software and licenses (for software compliance and financial reasons). Hardware and software may then be returned to inventory, reused, or disposed of permanently. all wipe IT Asset Management: Actors and Roles The IT asset management process involves various actors who have different roles and responsibilities in ensuring the effective and efficient management of IT assets throughout their life cycle. Some of the key actors and their descriptions: The IT asset manager: The IT asset manager is the person who is responsible for the execution of the IT asset management process. The IT asset manager oversees the day-to-day activities of IT asset management, such as planning, acquiring, deploying, maintaining, disposing, and retiring IT assets. The IT asset manager also coordinates with other actors, such as IT asset owners, audit and compliance, configuration managers, and other process integrations, to ensure the IT assets The IT asset owner: The IT asset owner is the person who has the authority and accountability for an IT asset or a group of IT assets. The IT asset owner defines the requirements, specifications, and business value of the IT assets and approves their acquisition, deployment, and disposal. The IT asset owner also ensures that the IT assets are used in accordance with the organizational policies and standards and that they are protected from unauthorized access, modification, or Audit and compliance: Audit and compliance is the function that verifies and validates that the IT asset management process is compliant with the internal and external regulations, standards, and best practices. Audit and compliance function also evaluates the effectiveness and efficiency of the IT asset management process and identifies any gaps or risks that need to be addressed. Audit and compliance provide recommendations and feedback to the process owner and the IT The configuration manager: The configuration manager is the person who is responsible for maintaining and updating the service component repository and works closely with the IT asset management process owner. These two main actors work together on decisions such as to where and in what repositories information is kept regarding asset related details. While there are two distinct processes with their independent purposes and objectives, this does not necessarily mean are properly managed and controlled. loss. asset manager on how to improve the IT asset management process. that separate repositories are required.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 339 There are three general types of roles within an ITAM program based on the activities spanning both the IT and the business organizations. These roles and responsibilities are categorized as: Process roles Cross-functional roles Supporting organizational roles These roles are positions within the ITAM program that are necessary for the program to exist and function. Every organization will be different in the defined roles and numbers of people within the All the processes encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process include the ITAM program. However, there are core roles that are mandatory for success. following: The IT asset manager The IT asset manager role manages the day-to-day activities within the ITAM program in alignment with the overall program goals and objectives. Typically, there are separate IT asset managers for HAM and SAM. However, while there are different procedures for each, they should be managed as a single asset management process. While common in many organizations, not separating these roles would reduce silos and improve alignment. Each organization will decide which of the program roles will be in scope for the overall ITAM program and whether these roles are within the ITAM program or positioned elsewhere in the organization. Key responsibilities: Defining the processes, procedures, and policies that are required for IT asset acquisition, IT asset Identifying and defining the processes, procedures, and policies that must be followed outside of Managing and directing the ITAM program staff and their day-to-day execution of the processes Measuring and optimizing the operational performance of processes, procedures, and policies within the IT asset acquisition, IT asset life cycle management, IT asset disposal, and IT asset ITAM relies on several roles outside of the specific process manager role to ensure compliance with the Integrations with several ITSM processes (life cycle management) as well as IT SMEs playing practitioner life cycle management, IT asset disposal, and IT asset document management the ITAM program and monitoring that these are being carried out and procedures as well as participating as necessary in the daily execution document management process. roles (life cycle and documentation management) are keys to success. A clear understanding of roles and responsibilities is crucial.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management The IT asset analyst 340 All IT staff have specific behaviors and activities that are responsible for aspects of IT asset management. In addition to the generic responsibilities of the analyst role, these include: The responsibilities of the roles embedded in the ITSM capability areas with ITAM processes and The activities that are critical to the success of ITAM processes and controls and should be policies measured as part of their job function Supporting organizational roles These roles are assumed by persons in the IT and business organizations who need to adhere to the ITAM These roles typically include purchasing and procurement, legal and compliance, the day-to-day users The responsibilities of these roles are embedded in the ITAM processes and policies associated with the program processes, procedures, and policies. of IT assets, and the owners of IT assets. IT assets. IT Asset Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) The most important overall critical success factors (CSFs) for ITAM followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: All IT assets are accurately identified throughout their life cycle KPIs: The percentage of IT assets with complete and up-to-date inventory data The number of assets with complete inventory data The percentage of IT assets with valid and compliant licenses The total number of IT assets The number of total IT assets The number of IT assets with valid and compliant licenses CSF: All IT assets must be justified and approved. KPIs: A reduction in the number/percentage of nonauthorized IT assets acquired (bypassing accepted practices/policy) CSF: The current status and IT asset attributes must remain accurate and be trusted. KPIS: A decrease in the percentage of discrepancies between actual versus recorded during discovery updates and inventory audits

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 341 CSF: The inventory of IT assets to be retired is managed. KPIs: A reduction in the occurrence of lost or stolen IT assets from the retired IT asset inventory CSF: The number of virtual and physical storage facilities are minimized. KPIs: A reduction in the number and percentage of IT asset document storage locations The CSFs for the IT asset acquisition activity followed by their KPIs: CSF: IT asset standards should be defined and used wherever possible. KPIs: An increase in the number/percentage of requested IT assets using IT asset standards A reduction. in the percentage of non-standard IT assets approved for acquisition CSF: All procured IT assets must be received and validated before authorization for payment. KPIs: A reduction in the number/percentage of invoices paid in error A1 reduction in the spend (cost) of invoices paid in error A reduction in the number/percentage of IT assets received that have not been validated against a purchase order CSF: All IT assets must have an asset tag with a unique identifier that is recorded into the IT asset repository. KPIs: An increase in the accuracy rate of IT asset information that is initially entered into the An increase in the timeliness of an entry following its receipt and validation IT asset repository

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 342 The CSFs for the IT asset life cycle management activity followed by their KPIS: CSF: Unused and underutilized IT assets must be recovered. KPIS: An increase in the number/percentage of unused IT assets recovered An increase in the number/percentage of underutilized IT assets recovered An increase in cost avoidance by using recovered IT assets versus purchasing new IT assets CSF: There should be no unauthorized IT assets. KPIs: A reduction in the number/percentage of unauthorized IT assets identified during discovery updates and inventory audits CSF: Compliance audits must be managed efficiently and effectively. KPIs: A reduction in the number of external audits A reduction in the time it takes to respond to external audit inquiries A1 reduction in the external audit-related fines and additional IT asset costs (purchase, true-ups, etc.) The CSFs for the IT asset disposal activity followed by their KPIs: CSF: Ensure that all IT assets are properly disposed of. KPIs: An increase in the proof of disposal documentation for all disposals A reduction in the costs and fines associated with improper disposal A reduction in the percentage of the improperly disposed IT assets leading to An increase in the frequency of internal audits of the disposal partners and vendors noncompliance issues CSF: The inventory ofl IT assets to be retired is managed. KPIs: An increase in the inventory accuracy rate of retired IT assets awaiting disposal A reduction in the number, percentage, and time of IT assets held in retirement pending disposal

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 343 CSF: The IT asset repository is updated with the final disposition attributes and status. KPIs: A reduction in the percentage of discrepancies between actual versus recorded during A reduction in the time to update the final disposition status in the repository audits of retired/disposed IT assets (compared to the actual disposal) The CSFs for the IT asset document management followed by their KPIS: CSF: Documents are effectively used to manage audits. KPIS: An increase in the success rate of compliance with the audit documentation requests A decrease in the time needed to provide documentation for the audit requests CSF: All documents have the identified and documented retention requirements. KPIs: A reduction. in the percentage of documents without the known retention requirements (both retention time and format) CSF: IT asset documents and their locations are accurately registered. KPIs: A1 reduction in the time needed to locate the physical IT asset documents Ar reduction in the percentage of occurrences of not being able to locate the requested An increase in the accuracy percentage of internal documentation audits documentation IT Asset Management: Integrations IT asset management (ITAM) is the practice of managing the life cycle, inventory, and costs of IT assets, such as hardware, software, and licenses. ITAM can benefit from integrating with other IT service management (ITSM) processes, such as change management, request management, and configuration management. Examples of how these integrations can work: Change management ITAM and change management: Change management is the process of controlling and documenting any changes to the IT environment, such as installing new software, upgrading hardware, or retiring old assets. Byi integrating ITAM and change management, organizations can ensure that any changes are aligned with the current and planned state of the IT assets, avoid conflicts or errors, and track the impact of changes on the asset performance and costs.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management Request management 344 ITAM and request management: Request management is the process of handling and fulfilling requests from users or customers for IT services or products, such as new laptops, software licenses, or access rights. By integrating ITAM and request management, organizations can streamline the request management process, check the availability and compatibility of the requested assets, automate the provisioning and delivery of the assets, and update the asset inventory and status accordingly. Configuration management ITAM and configuration management: Configuration management is the process of identifying, recording, and maintaining the service components that make up the IT infrastructure, such as servers, routers, applications, or databases. By integrating ITAM and configuration management, organizations can ensure that the service components are consistent with the actual IT assets, monitor the relationships and dependencies between the service components and the assets, and In addition, there are other process integrations that could also be considered in the IT asset management detect and resolve any discrepancies or issues. process: Financial management: Financial management is the process that manages budgeting, accounting, reporting, and analysis of the costs and benefits of IT assets. Financial management helps to optimize the return on investment (ROI) of IT assets and to align them with the business objectives. The integration between financial management and IT asset management encompasses: Budgeting alignment: Aligning IT asset management strategies with financial budgets to ensure effective allocation of funds for acquiring, maintaining, and disposing of IT assets. Cost optimization: Analyzing the total cost of ownership (TCO) of IT assets throughout their life cycle to make informed decisions about investments and cost-saving opportunities. Asset valuation: Integrating financial principles to accurately assess the value of IT assets, considering depreciation, market value, and potential resale value. Financial reporting: Generating financial reports that reflect the status, performance, and depreciation of IT assets for accounting, compliance, and decision-making purposes. Lifecycle cost analysis: Incorporating financial perspectives in evaluating the entire life cycle costs of IT assets, including acquisition, operation, maintenance, and disposal, to optimize expenditure. Procurement strategies: Collaborating between financial and IT teams to develop procurement strategies that balance cost-effectiveness with technological needs and compliance requirements. Risk management: Risk management is the process that identifies, assesses, prioritizes, mitigates, and monitors the risks associated with IT assets. Risk management helps to reduce or eliminate the potential negative impacts of IT assets on business operations, reputation, or security.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management Incident management: 345 ITAM provides information within the IT asset repository to support incident management ITAM provides policies for the inclusion of IT asset management activities in incident Incident management provides information. updates to the IT asset repository. Incident management provides information. used to assess IT asset performance and value. Incident management may identify and notify ITAM of any lost or stolen IT assets. Incident management provides feedback and corrections for missing or incorrect information. in activities. management. the IT asset repository. Problem management: ITAM provides information within the IT asset repository to support problem management RCA Problem management provides ITAM with information related to the IT asset performance and problems that are inputs to IT asset operations and long-term planning decisions. Problem management provides the information used to assess IT asset performance and value. Problem management provides information. updates to the IT asset repository. and other problem activities. Service catalog management: ITAM provides IT asset descriptions, policies for use and care, and other information. for inclusion in the catalog. Service level management (SLM): ITAM provides IT asset descriptions, policies for use and care, and other information for inclusion SLM provides performance metrics and feedback that directly or indirectly relates to IT assets. in SLAs. IT Asset Management: Enablers Enablers are essential components of any business process because they help to achieve the desired outcomes and objectives. In the context ofl IT asset management, enablers can be classified into three main Tools and technology are the software and hardware that support the IT asset management process. They enable the: identification, tracking, monitoring, and reporting of IT assets throughout their life cycle. Examples of tools and technology for IT asset management are IT asset discovery tools, IT asset inventory systems, IT asset management software, barcode scanners, RFID tags, etc. Examples of technology categories tools and technology, resources, and process documentation. requirements: The ITSM tool set supports the management of an IT asset repository: This is often referred to as the IT asset management database (AMDB). This repository is a database for storing information about IT assets, IT asset records, and attributes.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 346 IT service management tool supports IT asset/workflow record association: All ITSM capabilities potentially need to have access to the IT asset information, can provide updates to the IT asset information, and may reference/link workflow records to IT assets (such Once an IT asset is received and installed, it is contingent on needing support and maintenance, as incidents, problems, changes, releases, and requests). being moved or updated, and being reallocated for a different use. The ITSM tool set supports the use of scanning technology: update information. in the IT asset repository. This technology provides the ability to scan barcode information and systematically add to or Scanning technology typically makes use of a universal product code (UPC) barcode, a quick response (QR) barcode, and/or radio-frequency identification (RFID) technologies. The ITSM tool set supports the use of discovery technology: This technology actively or passively monitors the intrastructure environment to discover the current status of IT assets and add or update information in the IT asset repository. Iti isi important to note that these tools can only identify IT assets that are in the network physically or wirelessly. Thus, manual discovery will be needed for these other IT assets. The ITSM tool set supports software license management: These tools help an organization manage software licenses that are in inventory and in use as well Many of these tool sets also perform software normalization to assist with maintaining software as monitor software usage. compliance. The ITSM tool set supports software metering: This technology provides the ability to monitor and report the actual usage of installed software. A critical component of this tool set is the ability to manage usage in compliance with license This is typically conducted at the server, desktop, or laptop levels. requirements. The ITSM tool set supports software inventory normalization: These tools categorize installed software based on common elements, such as product, manufacturer, and version number by using the software identification (SWID) tag. This allows an organization to organize software data and keep track of details across the network to assist with maintaining software compliance. The ITSM tool set supports the use of deployment tools: These tools are specific to the IT asset and provide the ability to install, update, or deinstall applications and software components onto a physical or virtual device. The ITSM tool set supports mobile device/application management: These technology tools manage and secure mobile devices across multiple providers and multiple mobile operating systems. They also manage, distribute, and secure applications used on mobile devices, distribute and manage: mobile application licenses, and provide usage tracking.

Chapter 15: IT Asset Management 347 The ITSM tool set supports integration with financial purchasing and procurement systems: Purchase orders (POs) are a primary trigger for the acquisition of new or additional IT assets. While this doesn't necessarily require a full technology integration or federation with the IT asset repository, it does require processes and controls to ensure the necessary alignment. This ensures the IT assets are linked to purchase orders and thus enables the ability to validate the receipt of the IT assets against the purchase orders. The ITSM tool set supports integration with vendor and contract management systems: These systems provide the capability to record and manage information about all vendors and their related contracts in relation to IT assets in the IT asset repository. The ITSM tool set supports or integrates to support geolocation and tracking: stakeholders if an IT asset is found outside its geofenced location. The ITSM tool set supports or integrates to support geofencing: This provides geolocation and geofencing tracking capabilities and enables a notification to This includes the capability to automatically, or on-demand, remote-wipe all corporate data from Resources are the people and budgets that are allocated to the IT asset management process. They enable the execution, maintenance, and improvement of the process. Examples of resources for IT asset management are IT asset managers, IT asset owners, IT asset custodians, staff, vendors, contractors, etc. Process documentation is the set of policies, standards, procedures, guidelines, and best practices that define and govern the IT asset management process. They enable consistency, compliance, and quality off the process. Examples of process documentation for IT asset: management are an IT asset management policy, IT asset management plan, IT asset life cycle model, IT asset classification scheme, IT asset an IT asset or block or unenroll the device from the organization's network. register, etc. Other potential enablers of IT asset management: Organizational culture: The values, beliefs, and behaviors that support and promote the IT asset Stakeholder engagement: The communication and collaboration among the internal and external Performance measurement: The collection and analysis of data and metrics that evaluate the Continuous improvement: The ongoing review and enhancement of the IT asset management management process within the organization parties that are involved or affected by the IT asset management process effectiveness and efficiency of the IT asset management process process based on feedback, lessons learned, and best practices

Chapter 16: Configuration Management Configuration management is the process of identifying, controlling, and maintaining the information and relationships of service components throughout their service life cycle. It ensures that accurate and reliable data about the components are available to support decision-making and service delivery. Configuration management is an important part in the ITSM execution processes. It serves as the central hub for information sharing and collaboration. Although configuration management provides information to all ITSM processes, it is particularly helpful to the problem management, change management, release and deployment management, and incident management processes. These processes rely heavily on the information stored within the service component repository to facilitate their day-to-day activities. Configuration Management: Purpose and Objectives Purpose: To ensure that IT systems and services are consistent, reliable, and secure throughout their life Configuration management is a vital process that aligns IT and the business by ensuring that the IT systems and services that support the business goals are consistent, reliable, and secure throughout their Configuration management involves identifying, tracking, and controlling all the components (service components) that make up the IT infrastructure, such as. hardware, software, documentation, and people. Configuration management also provides accurate and sound information about the status, relationships, and dependencies of service components, which are stored in a service component repository (SCR). This information helps IT to plan, design, deliver, operate, and improve IT services Service component: A part of a service or system (e.g., hardware or software) that can be uniquely For example, a web server, a database, a network router, or a user interface are all service components cycle life cycle. effectively and efficiently. identified and used to deliver or support the service that contribute to the functionality and performance of a web service.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 349 Defining service components and relating them to services is important for several reasons: First, it helps to identify the dependencies and interactions between different components and Second, it helps to measure and monitor the quality and availability of each component and Third, it helps to allocate resources and costs to each component and service, which can enable services that can facilitate troubleshooting, maintenance, and optimization. service that can improve customer satisfaction and service level agreements. more efficient and transparent budgeting and pricing. Key objectives of configuration management: To account for all the components within the organization required to deliver IT services To provide accurate and sound information. on components and facilitate the service component To assess the risk associated with the implementation of a change to existing services repository integrity To quickly assess the impact of a service failure To facilitate the accurate costing and pricing of IT services A mature configuration management practice can bring many benefits to both IT and the business: Reducing costs and risks by avoiding unnecessary changes, errors, or incidents caused by Improving quality and performance by ensuring the IT systems and services meet the business Enhancing agility and innovation by enabling faster and easier changes, updates, or deployments Increasing customer satisfaction and trust by delivering reliable and secure IT systems and inaccurate or incomplete configuration information. requirements and expectations ofl IT systems and services services that support business outcomes

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 350 Configuration Management: Policies by a group of people or a business organization"2 "Policy: A set of ideas or a plan of what to do in particular situations that has been agreed to officially It is essential to balance practicality with a view to excessive policies that lead to bureaucracy. The following policy statements are examples that are beneficial for the achievement of the purpose and objectives of this process. They should be adopted and adapted as required to suit each organization's goals. Policy statement A single configuration management approach, on an ITSM best practice, will be utilized throughout the organization. An example policy could be: "All service components must be registered and managed in the central service component repository.'A systems approach An integrated configuration management system (CMS) must exist. The reason for the policy establish a common framework based and toolset for configuration management across the organization. Ithelps to avoid duplication, inconsistency, and confusion among different teams and stakeholders. Benefits A single approach and system This policy area aims to Better support for all ITSM processes through a consistent process and related data When multiple tools are used, they must adhere to the common architecture. This ensures that data can be consistently accessed across the tool sets, perhaps through views, and can be integrated in a way that can establish an end-to-end service impact. Decreases the risk of different departments implementing tools that don'tintegrate into the overall CMS Reduces the cost and redundant work to configure and maintain conflicting tools Allows the organization to evaluate best-of-breed tools as long as they fit into the overall CMS common architecture 22 Dictionary, Cambridge. "Policy."" Cambridge.org. Accessed May 11, 2023. https:/dictionary.cambridgc.org/us/dictionary/english/policy

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 351 Policy statement Controlled access Access to update the SCR records is controlled, and access rights are only given to those people who are authorized to control the data. An example policy could be: "All changes to service components must follow the change management process and be approved by the change control board (CCB)." Data integrity The reason for the policy This policy area aims to protect the service components from unauthorized or accidental changes that could compromise their quality or functionality. It helps to ensure that only authorized personnel can access, modify, or delete service components. Benefits Ensures accurate and up-to date data when only those designated to control the records have access This policy area aims to ensure that the data in the service component repository is accurate, complete, and up-to date. Itl helps to support effective decision-making; and reporting based on reliable information. Provides assurance to other process owners and users of the data that the data is The configuration management process data owners are responsible for ensuring the reliability of the SCR and the integrity of the service component records. An example policy could be: "All service components must have a unique identifier and a defined set of attributes that describe their characteristics and relationships. Data reliability Information services must be available to support timely decision making. An example policy could be: be backed up regularly and have a defined recovery plan in case of emergencies. reliable This policy area aims to ensure that the data in the service component repository is available, accessible, and recoverable at all times. It also helps to prevent data loss or corruption due to system Availability of data is ensured through practice related to ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) Information is made available to key stakeholders and other processes when required good and data about "All service components must failures or disasters.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 352 Policy statement Regulatory compliance Any external regulatory requirements for configuration management must be addressed in process, tool, and role development. Automated discovery and validation Automation for data collection and verification should be implemented and appropriately configured. Version control All service components identified in the configuration management scope must be recorded in the SCR and must have version numbers. Reporting The reason for the policy This policy area aims to enforce the tools and control-of-data elements that comply with the configuration management plan and external requirements. Benefits @ Compliance with external legislation and governance This policy area aims to reduce errors from manual data entry and labor costs. Improves the ability to assure data reliability Reduces the cost of manual labor Improves the ability to keep data up to date Helps to create a culture of identifying, controlling, and verifying service component data throughout the organization Communicates the effectiveness of the capability, tools, and people for keeping the information up-to-date and accurate Provides assurance to other capability owners and users of the data that the data is Identifies opportunities for capability, tool, and staff improvements Identifies opportunities for capability, tool, and staff improvements Identifies the cost of maintaining information related to the value to the organization This policy area aims to ensure that in-scope service components are accounted for and recorded consistently. This policy area aims to assess the performance measures (e.g efficiency and effectiveness, and cost) of controlling the information in the CMS. Configuration management metrics and management reports are provided to management and customers in accordance with outlined procedures and agreements. reliable Reviews and assessment Reviews are conducted by the process owner on a regular basis at the process owner's discretion. Reviews will focus on the process capability, consistency, and maturity. This policy area aims to maximize capability benefits and reduce costs.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 353 Configuration Management: Terms and Definitions What is configuration? In various communities and areas of specialization, the phrase configuration management may have different meanings and context: A noun (the current configuration): What is the current configuration of an IT asset, device, or A verb (to configure): The act of configuration via orchestration, provisioning, and deployment An artifact (the standard configuration): Software configuration, the old use of the term that is now known as trunk management in DevOps vernacular, focuses on documenting and storing software artifacts that are version-controlled and refers to an actual instance of a script that's It gets even more confusing because it is possible to use all three of these applications of the word, end-to-end service model? tools housed as code in a software repository. configuration, together in the same discussion. Examples of how all three concepts work together: Software orchestration, provisioning, and deployment: A device (physical/virtual) is configured (verb) based on a standard configuration script (artifact), and then that configuration (noun) is Compliance assurance: Validating that the environments meet regulatory requirements and audit controls by using only standard configuration scripts (artifacts) for automated device and environmental configuration (verb) and then being able to report on the current configuration Identifying a configuration drift: Configuration drift happens when production or a primary hardware and software environmental configuration'drifts'or becomes different in some way from an authorized standard version or secondary service continuity environment. captured in an IT asset or service component repository. (noun) An example to illustrate these three points: To understand if drift exists, there must be an ability to compare the current configuration of an object or device as discovered by a monitoring tool (noun) to the standard or baseline configuration record in the service component repository (different noun). If drift is indeed discovered, the devicefenvironment needs to be reconfigured (verb) by using the standard configuration script (artifact) with the configuration management toolchain.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 354 Preproduction Production Spotfire Wrike a Jenkins appium ANSIBLE API  bridge Automated test API bridge JMeter Environmental configuration Continuous integration Automated build Automated provisioning SALTSTACK I a Code Automated deployment 1 I Adobe Analytics FLURRY d docker  slack GitHub GitLab SMARTBEAR Chef Code Code Code Code commit commit commit commit commit Software development and management configuration Software Service model configuration IT asset mgmt. and service configuration management practices Figure 34: Configuration (noun, verb, artifact?) Also, when understanding the concept of configuration management, it is helpful to think about these three terms in comparison and as a taxonomy and/or level of data management: Inventory management: Tracks and manages the IT infrastructure inventory as it relates to key Asset management: Builds upon inventory management as: iti is concerned with tracking financial information as well as inventory-level data. IT asset management is concerned with tracking the total cost of ownership, lease management, depreciation, maintenance contracts, etc. Configuration management: Configuration management as a capability and discipline includes and builds upon the data tracked by inventory and IT asset management by adding the mapping and tracking of relationships and associations between configuration records that comprise a product or service. Inventory and IT asset management are seen as subsets of ITSM configuration attributes, such as state, location, owner, user, quantity, color, etc. management. Additional terms and definitions Service component repository: A database that contains details about the attributes and the history of each service component as well as details of the important relationships between service components. This is a database or a system that stores information about service components, such as their attributes, relationships, dependencies, versions, and status. The service component repository enables the identification, tracking, and verification of the service components throughout their life cycle. For example, a service component repository may contain records of all the software applications, hardware devices, network devices, and documents that are used to provide IT services.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 355 Service component: A part of a service or system (e.g hardware or software) that can be uniquely Configuration or service component record: A record in a service component repository describing the A logical service component: The conceptual or abstract representation of the system or service design that focuses on the functional and behavioral aspects of the system, independent of the physical For example, a logical service component may be a web-hosting service provided to customers A physical or virtual service component: The tangible resources and technologies (e.g., hardware, software, and infrastructure elements) that are required to implement and run a system or service A physical service component is a tangible entity that can be seen or touched, such as a laptop or a router. A virtual service component is an intangible entity that exists in a virtual environment, such as a virtual machine or a cloud service. For example, a physical or virtual service component may be a specific web Configuration management system (CMS): Multiple tools and/or databases may be required to support the process. They will share a common architecture, connect virtually, and be incorporated into an IT environment: The sum of an organization's IT-related hardware, software, data communications Service component level: The lowest level at which identifiable items can still be uniquely distinguished Service component attribute: The characteristics and features associated with a component record Relationships: Relationships between service components refer to their links and associations and can be further divided into hierarchical (e.g, as a child of or as a component of) and logical (e.g-, as connected identified and used to deliver or support the service attributes and history of a component resource related to a service. implementation. server that runs on a particular hardware device or a cloud platform. overall, singular CMS. facilities, procedures, documentation, and people (identification code, status, connected to, etc.) to, uses, supports, provides, etc.).

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 356 Configuration Management: Triggering Events and Inputs The configuration management process ensures the service components and their relationships are accurately recorded and maintained throughout their life cycle. Examples of the triggering events for this process: Triggering events: An IT asset is deployed as a service component As service component is modified or retired A change request An IT asset is deployed as a service component: This means, it is used to deliver a service to the A service component is modified or retired: This means, it is changed or removed from the service. A change request: In both of the previous triggering events, a change request must be submitted and approved before the event can take place, and the configuration management process must update the customers or users. service components and the service component repository accordingly. Inputs: A configuration baseline Change requests linked to IT assets The IT asset repository The service component repository Internal and external audits Acquisitions and mergers Policies A configuration baseline is a snapshot of the configuration of a service component at a given point in Change requests linked to IT assets are formal requests to modify the configuration of a service component, such as adding, removing, or updating hardware, software, or documentation. The IT asset repository is a database that stores information about the assets, including those in use and The service component repository is a database that stores information about the service components that make up the IT services delivered by an organization, such as their dependencies, relationships, and configuration, and about the service components owned or used by an organization, such as their Internal and external audits are systematic examinations of the configuration management process and its outputs, such as the configuration baselines and the repositories, to ensure that they comply with the time. It serves as a reference point for future changes and audits. in storage, and provides a logical representation of the IT asset inventory. location, status, ownership, and configuration. policies, standards, and regulations.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 357 Acquisitions and mergers are events that involve the integration or separation of IT assets and service components from different organizations, which may require changes to the configuration management Policies are the rules and guidelines that define the scope, objectives, roles, responsibilities, and The configuration management process uses these inputs to establish and maintain accurate and reliable information about the configuration of service components, which supports other IT service management processes such as change management, incident management, problem management, and release process and its outputs. procedures of the configuration management process. management. Triggering events Inputs Anl ITa asset is deployed as a service component Aservice component is modified or retired Achange request A configuration baseline Change requests linked tol IT assets Thel IT asset repository The service component repository Internal and external audits Acquisitions and mergers Policies Other? Figure 35: Configuration management: triggering events and inputs Configuration Management: Terminating Events and Outputs Terminating events: The updated service component records The updated service component records are a terminating event for the configuration management process because it indicates that the changes have been implemented and verified. The configuration management process ensures that the service components are consistent with their specifications and requirements throughout their life cycle. When the records are updated, it means that the process has completed its objectives and can be closed. Outputs: Accurate service component information An updated service component repository Verification and audit results The availability of information to other processes Accurate service component information means that the service components and their attributes, relationships, and dependencies are recorded and maintained in a reliable and consistent way. This information is essential for planning, designing, delivering, and supporting IT services.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 358 Update of the service component repository, which is a database or a system that stores the service components and their information: The repository is updated whenever a service component is created, modified, or deleted, ensuring that the current state of the IT infrastructure is reflected. Verification and audit results are the outcomes of checking and validating the accuracy and completeness of the service component information and the repository. Verification and audit activities are performed regularly, or when there is a significant change in the IT environment, to identify and The availability of information to other processes means that the service component information. and the repository are accessible and usable by other IT service management processes, such as change management, incident management, problem management, etc. This information helps these processes resolve any discrepancies or errors. to perform their tasks more effectively and efficiently. Terminating event Updated service component records Outputs Accurate service component information Update service component repository Verification and audit results Available information to other processes Figure 36: Configuration management: terminating events and outputs Configuration Management: Themes and Activities The process themes for configuration management include consistency and compliance, planning, and the management of risk. These themes reflect the main objectives and challenges of managing changes in complex systems and environments. The configuration management process activities that would support these themes: Planning: Defining the scope, objectives, roles, responsibilities, and resources for configuration management; identifying and analyzing service components and their dependencies; determining the configuration management strategy, methods, tools, and techniques; and developing and maintaining Consistency and compliance: Establishing and maintaining baselines, standards, policies, and procedures for service components; performing audits and reviews to verify and validate configuration status and documentation; reporting and resolving any discrepancies or nonconformities; and ensuring configuration management plans, schedules, and budgets alignment with stakeholder requirements and expectations

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 359 The management of risk: Identifying, assessing, prioritizing, and mitigating risks associated with configuration changes; implementing change control processes and procedures; evaluating and approving change requests; tracking and monitoring change implementation and impacts; and The following table represents a high-level set of activities for configuration management. communicating and documenting change information and status Activity Planning: Service component repository Configuration management system Configuration management scope Description A considerable amount of planning needs to go into creating the CMS and service component repository (SCR) structures, processes, and before populating them with service component records containing the This planning activity involves all stakeholders and their requirements Note that key IT stakeholders include all ITSM processes, IT service Additional planning inputs for configuration management should include the Defining the levels of governance and the ownership of data, attributes, and relationships within the service component repository Determining the level of service components to be tracked and the Determining the data population and migration approaches for the SCR Defining any automated discovery of service component information Defining configuration naming, versioning and numbering conventions Defining the relationship types between service components, such as parent-child, hosts, installed on, provides data feed, etc. Defining the interface between the SCR and the IT asset management Defining reconciliation policies and the capabilities between monitoring Defining the interfaces between multiple data sources supporting the overall service component repository approach, both for data entry and query (applicable if the SCR is architected as multiple databases) Defining the service component registration capability (includes the identification of record-type ownership  service delivery, financial/asset, Maintaining an accurate status of the SCR where only authorized and Interfacing with other support organizations to ensure the most effective use of the SCR as part of the overall service management system procedures appropriate attributes: that will benefit from using the CMS and SCR. owners, and IT product owners. following activities: tracking policy database and alerting and configuration management Determining audit schedules/procedures and user-associated to the SCR records) registered components are active

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 360 Activity Description Specifying change management report metrics in support of the Ensuring other processes (e.g., incident management, problem management, release and deployment) are able to work effectively and efficiently with the service component repository Ensuring all components relative to IT service levels are registered Producing and distributing standard and customized reports Ensuring authorized procedures and work practices are followed Evaluating the configuration management process for continuous An object and data model illustrates the types of service components to be stored in the database and the types of information to be captured and stored configuration management process improvement Planning: Object and data modeling about these components: How different record types represented in the SCR are: a IT service D IT system a Subsystem Physical components Which attributes they have What relationships connect them The SCR must be capable of registering these basic components: Physical and virtual components: Server, switch, application, database, Logical/abstract components: IT services, systems, baseline records, etc. Component attributes: CPU speed, serial number, version, author, Component relationships: Parent-child, hosts, installed on, provides data Identification of service component types is an exercise that is undertaken when initially determining the scope of the records stored within the The scope and determination of component type refers to the types of service components to be stored in the database and the types of information to be captured and stored about these components. This determination is conducted initially, when the capability is being designed, and requires input from the capability design team and capability advisors representing the various functional or departmental groups that will be responsible for maintaining and administering the documents, etc. purchase date, etc. feed, etc. repository: database.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 361 Activity Description Through object and data-modeling techniques, a database of service component records can be created to present both a business service view as well as a technology view of how resources are related to support business processes. In effect, the goal of configuration management is to facilitate the creation of a real-time visual model of the IT environment in relation to how it The data model dictates how the IT services are mapped within the SCR. The practical application of this is the creation of the logical/abstract component records that represent IT services and how they break down into IT system, subsystem, and, finally, physical components. The concept presented by this approach allows the physical components (hardware, software, documents, To use an analogy, if the infrastructure is the puzzle and the service component record is the puzzle piece, then the configuration management object model design is the picture on the puzzle box. Just as it is difficult to build a puzzle without the picture, it is difficult to understand how various component types fit into the infrastructure without the object model. For each of the IT business services and technical IT systems, there is a record created in the SCR within the logical/abstract structure. Once this structure is built within the tool, the logical or abstract structure remains relatively static and does not change drastically unless a new service is introduced to the supports and delivers IT services. etc.) to be related into an IT service chain. environment. Franchise SLA Business Units Point of Sale Order Fulfillment $ Service Partner Ordering Facing Service L Ordering $ SLA Product System/ 1. O Pizza Delivered Prod Sales Admin Logistica 23 Service ITS Support System Service J L @0 SLA 3 A User Database Contract Figure 37: The configuration model costing and budgeting for services

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 362 Activity Compliance and risk: Identification and management of Description According to the results of planning and defining the object and data model, service components are uniquely identified, labeled, assigned an owner, populated with attributes, and assigned relationships between service components. service components The result is a set of related service components that describe the organization's infrastructure, services, and related roles. Compliance and risk: Control After the initial identification, the configuration management process ensures that no service component is added, modified, replaced, or removed without appropriate control and authorization to support data integrity. This control function is closely linked with the change management process that controls changes to the infrastructure and should therefore be involved in Additional ongoing control activities of configuration management: The registration of all new component records Updating existing component records with regard to: reflecting any changes to the SCR. Changes in the component status (including decommissioning) a Changes in the attributes, product and service categorization a Changes in system-related peer relationships and service The associated documentation arising from changes, builds, and The associated service records (incident, problem, change) License control (regulatory and legal requirements) Updating RFCS with related service components, status, and Updating the SCR after periodic audits of physical items relationships releases implementation details

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 363 Activity risk: Description The management of Status accounting provides current and historical data related to the changes Life cycle and state Typical states include registered, storage, production, and decommissioned. of state of service components throughout their life cycle. management This aspect of configuration management is responsible for the creation of policies around which states will be tracked and reported on by configuration According to best practices in the ITSM system, the tracking of states includes status accounting for planned, current, and decommissioned states for each component managed within the SCR. The goal is to enable traceability of changes to service components and their records (e.g., tracking the status of a service component as it changes from For example, the status of a component can change from registered'to storage-produrtion-decommissionedf; etc. Since a change in the status of a component is a change by itself, it may need to be managed by change Status accounting provides critical assistance to other ITSM processes in their An example of a helpful report would be to show all service components that have gone into a maintenance or unplanned nonproduction state more than five times in a six-month period. Information such as this would provide the needed information to problem management, which seeks to identify systemic infrastructure faults causing service Service component status or state reports need to be generated either as a management: one state to another): management. analytical and assessment activities: degradations. regular report or on an ad hoc basis as required.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 364 Activity risk: Verification and audit Description The management of Regular quality and integrity audits are required to verify that actual service components match their recorded state in the SCR. This ensures the data stored within the SCR is useful and accurate for making How and when this verification activity takes place can vary significantly depending on automation, policies, access rights, and SCR administration For example, a certain level of routine verification activity may take place at the service desk when a support analyst crosschecks the information from the SCR by asking the caller some standard questions. However, a more formalized means of verification is required to maintain Audits can take the form of spot checks of parts of the infrastructure, discovery tool differentiation reports, or full physical audits of the IT infrastructure. If anomalies are found, remediation is assigned to the The audits are conducted by the configuration manager and configuration coordinators, who are responsible for producing management information around the verification and audit activities of the process. management decisions. practices: data integrity. appropriate group. Configuration Management: Actors and Roles Some of the key actors and their descriptions: The configuration coordinator is the person who coordinates the activities of configuration management. The configuration coordinator maintains the configuration management system (CMS), which is a repository of information. about the IT assets and their relationships. The configuration coordinator also ensures the accuracy, completeness, and integrity of the CMS data and supports other processes that rely on the CMS information, such as change management, incident management, and The component owner is the person who owns a specific service component or a group of service components. The component owner is responsible for the acquisition, deployment, maintenance, utilization, and disposal of the service components under their ownership. The component owner also ensures compliance with the configuration management policies and standards and provides relevant problem management. information. to the configuration coordinator and the process owner.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 365 Audit and compliance is the function that verifies and validates the configuration management process and its outcomes. Audit and compliance conducts periodic audits to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the process, identify any gaps or risks, and recommend corrective actions. Audit and compliance also ensure that the configuration management process complies with the applicable laws, The change manager is the person who manages the change management process, which is another related process of configuration management. The change manager controls and coordinates all changes to the service components and their configurations to minimize any adverse impact on the business operations and services. The change manager also evaluates, authorizes, prioritizes, schedules, implements, tests, and reviews the changes and communicates with all relevant stakeholders. All the processes encompass the generic process owner, coordinator, and process worker roles along with their generic responsibilities. Additional roles and/or responsibilities for this process: In addition to the generic responsibilities of the manager role, responsibilities include: regulations, contracts, and agreements. The configuration manager Ensuring integration with the other ITSM processes, especially change management Planning and developing the service component repository (SCR) data model Defining maintenance capabilities and procedures for the CMS and SCR Defining core policies Proposing and agreeing to the scope of the configuration management process, items that are to Proposing and agreeing to the level at which service components are to be identified Ensuring that the SCR reflects the authorized state of the IT infrastructure and services Defining status accounting requirements to support other service management capabilities Audits are conducted by the configuration manager and configuration coordinators, where be controlled, and information that is to be recorded Distributing management reports about service components Evaluating and arranging for the procurement of the support tools coordinators audit the component records within various domains. Component owners The service component owner of each technical domain or area is responsible for maintaining a record Typically, these areas are maintaining various data repositories in spreadsheets and databases that need A critical success factor is the establishment and formalization of this role for each technical domain or oft the components under their management and control. to be transferred to a central and/or federated SCR (the CMS). technology area responsible for updating the SCR: Experience shows that, while the maintenance of this data should be a natural activity for each of these groups, very few keep their existing repositories up to date to a level that would be useful for management decision-making or for supporting the other ITSM processes.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 366 Unless accountability and measurement systems are changed to raise the profile of this activity to measure compliance to the configuration management process, the SCR will end up in the same state as most of the existing data repositories the organization has today. a For this reason, it is critical the configuration manager works with service component owners on the creation of reports about the integrity of the data and the compliance by When areas of concern are identified, it is up to the process owner to provide the necessary the various groups involved. influence to facilitate the cultural changes required to maintain the database. Configuration Management: Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) The critical success factors (CSFs) followed by their key performance indicators (KPIS): CSF: Provide reliable IT component and relationship information. KPIS: The percentage of process records without a related service component The number of process records with relationships The number of process records without relationships The percentage of service components managed by the configuration management process The number of service components The number of new service components added by week/month The percentage reduction in the number of RFCS without service component records The percentage reduction in the percentage of inaccurate service component records The percentage increase in customer satisfaction with the SCR accuracy and ease of use The percentage reduction in the number of component record attribute errors found in the SCR CSF: Support the delivery of quality IT services. KPIs: The percentage increase in the integration of the SCR with the other ITSM processes, specifically change, incident, problem, IT asset, and service level management The percentage increase in the results of the efficiency and effectiveness reviews The percentage increase in the integrity of the SCR data to the actual real-time environment, based on systems management tools or audits The percentage increase in the accuracy of the results of configuration audits The percentage increase in the information about the unregistered service components that have been detected

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 367 CSF: Identify and manage the IT infrastructure information and relationships accurately and effectively, according to the business needs and agreed-upon policies. The percentage reduction in the number of failed RFCS from inaccurate SCR data The percentage increase in the number of authorized configurations The percentage reduction in the number of breached SLAs because of SCR errors KPIs: Configuration Management: Integrations Configuration management supports all other ITSM execution processes in some way with information related to IT services and the dependencies between service components. Some key integrations include the interdependence of configuration management on change management, incident management, The process integrations needed between configuration management and change management: problem management and release and deployment management. Configuration management provides accurate and up-to-date information about the current state and relationships of service components to change management, which helps to assess the Change management notifies configuration management about the planned and implemented changes to service components, which helps to update the configuration records and maintain Configuration management verifies that the changes have been implemented correctly and that no unauthorized changes have occurred, which helps to ensure the compliance and auditability Configuration management also needs to integrate with other IT service management processes, such as: Incident management: Configuration management provides information about the service components involved in incidents, which helps to diagnose and resolve them faster. Problem management: Configuration management provides information about the service components affected by problems, which helps toidentify the root causes and prevent recurrence. Release and deployment management: Configuration management coordinates the deployment of new or changed service components to the IT environment, which helps to minimize Service level management: Configuration management monitors the performance and availability of service components, which helps to measure and report on the service levels impact, risk, and feasibility of proposed changes. the integrity of the configuration baseline. of the IT infrastructure. disruption and ensure alignment with business requirements. delivered to customers.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 368 Configuration Management: Enablers Enablers are essential components of any business process, as they help to ensure its smooth and effective operation. In configuration management, enablers are the factors or elements that support or facilitate planning, identification, control, status accounting, and verification of service components. Some examples of enablers for configuration management: Tools and technology: These are the software or hardware devices that assist in managing and tracking the service components, such as service component repository, version control systems, change management tools, etc. They help to automate and streamline the configuration management process, reduce errors, and enhance security and reliability. Examples of technology requirements: The service component repository (SCR) can be made up of various data repositories linked and federated, through some manner, to record and manage a configuration The SCR can be accessed by the other ITSM process workflow records (incident, problem, knowledge, change, request, and release and deployment management) for query and The SCR enables the ability to define and map relationships with or between component The SCR must facilitate the record-to-record linking and navigation to support the data The SCR must facilitate the creation of custom database queries and report generation. Discovery tools are needed to facilitate the population of service component records and attributes where applicable and assist with the validation of real-time data to the data One of the myths propagated by many software vendors is the perception that all the data in the SCR can be populated and maintained by using network discovery tools. While it is true that these tools can provide part of the solution, they are not the only answer required. This is largely due to the fact that not every attribute related to service components is discoverable. The reality is that ongoing human intervention and Resources: These are the human or material assets that are involved in performing the configuration management activities, such as configuration managers, configuration analysts, configuration auditors, etc. They help to provide the necessary skills, knowledge, and expertise for managing and maintaining the service components as well as ensuring compliance with management system. association. records. model. recorded within the SCR for audit purposes. management of the data and relationships will be required. standards and regulations.

Chapter 16: Configuration Management 369 Process documentation: These are the written or electronic records that describe the configuration management process, such as policies, procedures, guidelines, plans, reports, etc. They help to define the roles and responsibilities, objectives and scope, methods and techniques, inputs and outputs, and quality criteria for configuration management. Other potential enablers of configuration management: Organizational culture: This is the shared values, beliefs, and norms that influence how people behave and interact within an organization. A positive and supportive organizational culture can foster collaboration, communication, and trust among the stakeholders involved in configuration Stakeholder engagement: This is the process of involving and communicating with the internal and external parties who have an interest or influence on the configuration management process, such as customers, vendors, regulators, etc. Stakeholder engagement can help to identify and address their needs and expectations as well as solicit their feedback and suggestions for management as well as encourage innovation and continuous improvement. improving the configuration management process.